1 
 
PROVINCIAL ASSEMBLY OF SINDH 
NOTIFICATION 
KARACHI, THE 11TH JUNE, 2014 
 
 
NO.PAS/Legis-B-25/2013-The Sindh Child Marriages Restraint Bill, 2013 having been 
passed by the Provincial Assembly of Sindh on 28th April, 2014 and assented to by the Governor 
of Sindh on 10th June, 2014 is hereby published as an Act of the Legislature of Sindh. 
 
THE SINDH CHILD MARRIAGES RESTRAINT ACT, 2013 
 
SINDH ACT NO.XV OF 2014 
 
AN 
ACT 
 to restrain the solemnization of child marriages. 
 
 WHEREAS it is expedient to restrain the solemnization of child 
marriages. 
 
 It is hereby enacted as follows:- 
 
Preamble. 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Sindh Child Marriages Restraint Act, 2013. 
 
 (2) It shall come into force at once. 
 
Short title and 
commencement. 
2. 
In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or 
context – 
 
(a) 
"child” means a person male or female who is under eighteen 
years of age; 
 
(b) 
“child marriage” means a marriage to which either of the 
contracting party is a child; 
 
(c) 
“Code” means the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (No. V 
of 1898); 
 
(d) 
“contracting party” to marriage means either of the party 
whose marriage is, or is about to be solemnized; 
 
(e) 
 “Court” means the Court of a Judicial Magistrate of First 
Class; 
 
(f) 
“Government” means the Government of Sindh. 
 
 
Definitions. 
3. 
Whoever, being a male above eighteen years of age, contracts a child 
marriage shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment which may extend to 
three years but shall not be less than two years and shall be liable to fine. 
 
 
Punishment for male 
contracting party. 
2 
 
4. 
Whoever performs, conducts, directs, brings about or in any way 
facilitates any child marriage shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment 
which may extend to three years but shall not be less than two years and shall 
also be liable to fine, unless he proves that he had reason to believe that the 
marriage was not a child marriage. 
 
Punishment for 
solemnizing a child 
marriage. 
5. (1) Where a parent or guardian or any other person in any capacity, lawful 
or unlawful, does any act to promote the child marriage or permits it to be 
solemnized, or fails to prevent it negligently, from being solemnized, shall be 
punished with rigorous imprisonment which may extend to three years but 
shall not be less than two years and shall also be liable to fine. 
 
(2) For the purposes of this section, it shall be presumed, until contrary is 
proved, that where a child has been contracted into a marriage, a person 
having charge of such child failed to prevent the marriage from being 
solemnized. 
Punishment for parent 
or guardian concerned 
in a child marriage. 
6. 
Notwithstanding anything contained in section 190 of the Code, no 
court other than the Court of a Judicial Magistrate of First Class shall take 
cognizance of or try any offence under this Act. 
 
Jurisdiction under this 
Act. 
7. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law, 
the court may, if satisfied from information laid before it through an 
application that a child marriage in contravention of this Act is going to be 
arranged or is about to be solemnized, issue an injunction prohibiting such 
marriage. 
(2) No injunction under sub-section (1), shall be issued against any 
person unless the Court has previously given notice to such person, and has 
afforded him an opportunity to show cause against the issue of the injunction. 
The Court may dispense with notice if deemed necessary. 
 (3) The Court may, either on its own motion or on an application of any 
person, rescind or alter any order made under sub-section (1). 
(4) Where an application is received, the Court shall afford an opportunity 
of appearing before it either in person or by pleader; and if the Court rejects 
the application wholly or in part, it shall record in writing its reasons for so 
doing. 
 (5) Whoever, knowing that an injunction has been issued against him under 
sub-section (1) of this section, disobeys such injunction, shall be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one 
year or fine or with both. 
Power to issue 
injunction prohibiting 
marriage in 
contravention of this 
Act. 
8. 
Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, an offence 
punishable under this Act shall be cognizable, non-bailable and non-
compoundable. 
 
Offence to be 
punishable and triable. 
9. The Court shall on taking cognizance of a case proceed with the trial 
and conclude the case within ninety days. 
Cognizance, trial and 
conclusion of the case. 
10. Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
 
Rules. 
11. 
No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie, against any 
person in respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended to be 
done under this Act. 
Indemnity. 
3 
 
 
12. 
If any difficulty arises in giving effect to any of the provisions of this 
Act, Government may make such order, not inconsistent with the provisions 
of this Act, as may appear to Government to be necessary for the purpose of 
removing the difficulty. 
Removal of difficulty. 
 
 
 
13. (1) The provisions of the Child Marriage Restraint Act, 1929, relating to 
the Province of Sindh are hereby repealed. 
 
 (2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Child Marriages Restraint Act, 1929, 
all orders made, decisions taken, judgment passed by any Court, shall be 
deemed to have been validly made, taken and passed under this Act. 
 
 
 
Repeal and saving. 
______________ 
 
 
BY ORDER OF THE SPEAKER 
PROVINCIAL ASSEMBLY OF SINDH 
 
 
 G.M.UMAR FAROOQ 
 SECRETARY 
 PROVINCIAL ASSEMBLY OF SINDH