[THE PROTECTION AGAINST HARASSMENT OF WOMEN AT THE 
WORKPLACE ACT 2010] 
 
PART 1 
Acts, Ordinance, President’s Orders and Regulations 
 
SENATE SECRETARIAT 
Islamabad, the 11th March, 2010 
 
No. F. 9 (5)/2009- Legis.__ The following Acts of Majlis-e-Shoora 
(Parliament) received the assent of the President on 9th March, 2010, are hereby 
published for general information:__ 
 
Act No. IV OF 2010 
 
An Act to make provisions for the protection against harassment of women at the 
workplace 
 
 
WHEREAS the constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan recognizes the 
fundamental rights of citizens to dignity of person; 
 
AND WHEREAS it is expedient to make this provision for the protection of 
women from harassment at the workplace; 
It is hereby enacted as follows: 
 
1. 
Short title, extent and commencement. - (1) This Act may be called the 
Protection against Harassment of women at the Workplace Act, 2010. 
 
(2) 
It extends to the whole of Pakistan. 
(3) 
It shall come into force at once. 
 
2. 
Definitions. – In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or 
context,– 
(a) 
“accused” means an employee or employer of an organization against 
whom complaint has been made under this Act; 
(b) 
“CBA” means Collective Bargaining Agent as provided in the Industrial 
Relations Act 2008,( IV of 2008) or any other law for the time being in 
force. 
(c) 
“Code” means the Code of Conduct as mentioned in the Schedule to this 
Act; 
(d) 
“Competent Authority” means the authority as may be designated by the 
management for the purposes of this Act; 
(e) 
“Complainant” means a woman or man who has made a complaint to the 
Ombudsman or to the Inquiry Committee on being aggrieved by an act of 
harassment; 
(f) 
“Employee” means a regular or contractual employee whether employed 
on daily, weekly, or monthly or hourly basis, and includes an intern or an 
apprentice; 
(g) 
“Employer” in relation to an organization, means any person or body of 
persons whether incorporated or not, who or which employs workers in an 
organization under a contract of employment or in any other manner 
whosoever and includes – 
 
 
(i) 
an heir, successor or assign, as the case may be, of such person or, 
body as aforesaid; 
 
(ii) 
any person responsible for the direction, administration, 
 
- 2 -
management and control of the management; 
(iii) 
the authority, in relation of an organization or a group of 
organization run by or under the authority of any Ministry or 
department of the Federal Government or a Provincial government, 
appointed in this behalf or, where no authority is appointed, the 
head of the Ministry or department as the case may be; 
(iv) 
the office bearer, in relation to an organization run by or on behalf 
of the local authority, appointed in this behalf, or where no officer 
is so appointed, the chief executive officer bearer of that authority; 
(v) 
the proprietor, in relation to any other organization, of such 
organization and every director, manager, secretary, agent or office 
bearer or person concerned with the management of the affairs 
thereof. 
(vi) 
a contractor or an organization of a contractor who or which 
undertakes to procure the labour or services of employees for use 
by another person or in another organization for any purpose 
whatsoever and for payment in any form and on any basis 
whatsoevery; and 
(vi) 
office bearers of a department of a Division of a Federal or a 
Provincial or local authority who belong to the managerial, 
secretarial or directional cadre or categories of supervisors or 
agents and those who have been notified for this purpose in the 
official Gazette; 
 
 
 (h) 
harassment” means any unwelcome sexual advance, request for sexual 
favors or other verbal or written communication or physical conduct of a 
sexual nature or sexually demeaning attitudes, causing interference with 
work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile or offensive work 
environment, or the attempt to punish the complainant for refusal to 
comply to such a request or is made a condition for employment; 
(i) 
“Inquiry Committee” means the Inquiry Committee established under 
 
- 3 -
sub-section (1) of section 3; 
(j) 
“management” means a person or body of persons responsible for the 
management of the affairs of an organization and includes an employer; 
(k) 
“Ombudsman” means the Ombudsman appointed under section 7 
 
(l) 
“organization” means a Federal or Provincial Government Ministry, 
Division or department, a corporation or any autonomous or semi-
autonomous body, Educational Institutes, Medical facilities established or 
controlled by the Federal or Provincial Government or District 
Government or registered civil society associations or privately managed a 
commercial or an industrial establishment or institution, a company as 
defined in the Companies Ordinance, 1984 (XLVII of 1984) and includes 
any other registered private sector organization or institution; 
(m) 
“Schedule” means Schedule annexed to this Act; 
(n) 
“workplace” means the place of work or the premises where an 
organization or employer operates and includes building, factory, open 
area or a larger geographical area where the activities of the organization 
or of employer are carried out and including any situation that is linked to 
official work or official activity outside the office. 
 
 
 
3. 
Inquiry Committee. – (1) Each organization shall constitute an Inquiry 
Committee within thirty days of the enactment of this Act to enquire into 
complaints under this Act. 
(2) The Committee shall consist of three members of whom at least one member 
shall be a woman. One member shall be from senior management and one shall be a 
senior representative of the employees or a senior employee where there is no CBA. 
One or more members can be co-opted from outside the organization if the 
organization is unable to designate three members from within as described above. A 
Chairperson shall be designated from amongst them. 
 
 
- 4 -
 (3) In case a complaint is made against one of the members of the Inquiry Committee 
that member should be replaced by another for that particular case. Such member may be 
from within or outside the organization. 
(4) 
In case where no competent authority is designated the organization shall within 
thirty days of the enactment of this Act designate a competent authority 
 
 
4. 
Procedure for holding inquiry.– (1) The Inquiry Committee, within three days 
of receipt of a written complaint, shall– 
(a) 
communicate to the accused the charges and statement of allegations 
leveled against him, the formal written receipt of which will be given; 
(b) 
require the accused within seven days from the day the charge is 
communicated to him to submit a written defense and on his failure to do 
so without reasonable cause, the Committee shall proceed ex-parte; and 
(c) 
enquire into the charge and may examine such oral or documentary 
evidence in support of the charge or in defense of the accused as the 
Committee may consider necessary and each party shall be entitled to 
cross-examine the witnesses against him. 
 
(2) 
Subject to the provisions of this Act and any rules made thereunder the 
Inquiry Committee shall have power to regulate its own procedure for conducting inquiry 
and for the fixing place and time of its sitting. 
 
(3) 
The following provisions inter alia shall be followed by the Committee in 
relation to inquiry: 
(a) 
The statements and other evidence acquired in the inquiry process 
shall be considered as confidential; 
(b) 
An officer in an organization, if considered necessary, may be 
nominated to provide advice and assistance to each party; 
(c) 
Both parties, the complainant and the accused, shall have the right 
to be represented or accompanied by a Collective Bargaining 
Agent representative, a friend or a colleague; 
 
- 5 -
(d) 
Adverse action shall not be taken against the complainant or the 
witnesses; 
(e) 
The inquiry Committee shall ensure that the employer or accused 
shall in no case create any hostile environment for the complainant 
so as to pressurize her from freely pursuing her complaint; and 
(f) 
The Inquiry Committee shall give its findings in writing by 
recording reasons thereof. 
 
(4) 
The Inquiry Committee shall submit its findings and recommendations to 
the Competent Authority within thirty days of the initiation of inquiry. If the Inquiry 
Committee finds the accused to be guilty it shall recommend to the Competent Authority 
for imposing one or more of the following penalties: 
 
(i) 
Minor penalties: 
 
(a) 
censure; 
(b) 
withholding, for a specific period, promotion or increment; 
(c) 
stoppage, for a specific period, at an efficiency bar in the 
time-scale, otherwise than for unfitness to cross such bar; and 
(d) 
recovery of the compensation payable to the complainant from 
pay or any other source of the accused; 
 
 
(ii) 
Major penalties: 
(a) 
reduction to a lower post or time-scale, or to a lower stage in a 
time-scale; 
(b) 
compulsory retirement; 
(c) 
removal from service; 
(d) 
dismissal from service; and 
 (e) 
Fine. A part of the fine can be used as compensation for the 
complainant. In case of the owner, the fine shall be payable to the 
complainant. 
 
 
(5) 
The Competent Authority shall impose the penalty recommended by the 
 
- 6 -
Inquiry Committee under sub-section (4) within one week of the receipt of the 
recommendations of the Inquiry Committee 
(6) 
The Inquiry Committee shall meet on regular basis and monitor the 
situation regularly until they are satisfied that their recommendations subject to decision, 
if any of Competent Authority and Appellate Authority have been implemented. 
 
(7) 
In case the complainant is in trauma the organization will arrange for 
psycho-social counseling or medical treatment and for additional medical leave. 
 
 
(8) 
The organization may also offer compensation to the complainant in case 
of loss of salary or other damages. 
 
5. 
Powers of the Inquiry Committee. – (1) The Inquiry Committee shall have 
power– 
(a) 
to summon and enforce attendance of any person and examine him on 
oath; 
 
(b) 
to require the discovery and production of any document; 
 
(c) 
to receive evidence on affidavits; and 
 
(d) 
to record evidence. 
 
 
(2) 
The Inquiry Committee shall have the power to inquire into the matters of 
harassment under this Act, to get the complainant or the accused medically examined by 
an authorized doctor, if necessary, and may recommend appropriate penalty against the 
accused within the meaning of sub-section (4) of section 4. 
 
 
(3) 
The Inquiry Committee may recommend to Ombudsman for appropriate 
action against the complainant if allegations leveled against the accused found to be false 
and made with mala fide intentions. 
 
 
(4) 
The Inquiry Committee can instruct to treat the proceedings confidential. 
 
 
6. 
Appeal against minor and major penalties.– (1) Any party aggrieved by 
 
- 7 -
decision of the Competent Authority on whom minor or major penalty is imposed may 
within thirty days of written communication of decision prefer an appeal to an 
Ombudsman established under section 7 . 
(2) 
A complainant aggrieved by the decision of the Competent Authority may 
also prefer appeal within thirty days of the decision to the Ombudsman. 
 
 
(3) 
The Appellate Authority may, on consideration of the appeal and any 
other relevant material, confirm, set aside, vary or modify the decision within thirty days 
in respect of which such appeal is made. It shall communicate the decision to both the 
parties and the employer. 
 
(4) 
Until such a time that the ombudsman is appointed the District Court shall have 
the jurisdiction to hear appeals against the decisions of Competent Authority and the provisions 
of sub-sections (1) to (3) shall mutatis mutandis apply 
 
(5) 
On the appointment of Ombudsman all appeals pending before the District Court 
shall stand transferred to Ombudsman who may proceed with the case from the stage at which it 
was pending immediately before such transfer. 
 
7. 
Ombudsman:- (1) The respective Governments shall appoint an ombudsman at 
the Federal and provincial levels. 
 
(2) A person shall be qualified to be appointed as an Ombudsman who has been a judge 
of high court or qualified to be appointed as a judge of high court. The Ombudsman may 
recruit such staff as required to achieve the purposes of this Act and the finances will be 
provided by the respective Governments 
 
8. 
Ombudsman to enquire into complaint.- (1) Any employee shall have the 
option to prefer a complaint either to the Ombudsman or the Inquiry Committee. ‘ 
 
(2) The Ombudsman shall within 3 days of receiving a complaint issue a written show cause 
notice to the accused. The accused after the receipt of written notice, shall submit written 
defense to the Ombudsman within five days and his failure to do so without reasonable 
cause the Ombudsman may proceed ex parte. Both the parties can represent themselves 
 
- 8 -
before the Ombudsman. 
 
(3)The Ombudsman shall conduct an inquiry into the matter according to the rules made 
 
under this Act and conduct proceedings as the Ombudsman deems proper. 
 
(4) For the purposes of an investigation under this Act, the Ombudsman may require any 
office or member of an organization concerned to furnish any information or to produce 
any document which in the opinion of the Ombudsman is relevant and helpful in the 
conduct of the investigation. 
 
(5) The Ombudsman shall record his decision and inform both parties and the management 
of the concerned organization for implementation of the orders. 
 
9. Representation to President or Governor:- Any person aggrieved by a decision of 
Ombudsman under sub- section (5) of section 8, may, within thirty days of decision, make a 
representation to the President or Governor, as the case may be, who may pass such order thereon 
as he may deem fit. 
 
10. 
 Powers of the Ombudsman 
The Ombudsman shall for the purpose of this Act have the same powers as are vested in a 
Civil Court under the Code of Civil Procedures, 1908 (Act V of 1908), in respect of the 
following matters, namely: 
i. 
Summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and 
examining him on oath; 
ii. 
Compelling the production of evidence; 
iii. 
Receiving evidence on affidavits; 
iv. 
Issuing commission for the examination of witnesses 
v. 
entering any premises for the purpose of making any inspection or 
investigation, enter any premises where the Ombudsman has a 
reason to believe that any information relevant to the case may be 
found; and 
vi. 
The Ombudsman shall have the same powers as the High Court 
has to punish any person for its contempt. 
(2) Ombudsman shall while making the decision on the complaint may impose any of the 
 
- 9 -
minor or major penalties specified in sub- section (4) of section 4. 
11. 
Responsibility of employer.– (1) It shall be the responsibility of the employer to 
ensure implementation of this Act, including but not limited to incorporate the Code of 
Conduct for protection against harassment at the workplace as a part of their 
management policy and to form Inquiry Committee referred to in section 3 and designate 
a competent authority referred to in section 4. 
 
(2) The management shall display copies of the Code in English as well as in 
language understood by the majority of employees at conspicuous place in the 
organization and the work place within six months of the commencement of this Act. 
 
 
 
(3) 
On failure of an employer to comply with the provisions of this section 
any employee of an organization may file a petition before the District Court and on 
having been found guilty the employer shall be liable to fine which may extend to one 
hundred thousand rupees but shall not be less than twenty-five thousand rupees. 
 
12. 
Provisions of the Act in addition to and not in derogation of any other law.– 
The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other law 
for the time being in force. 
 
 
13. 
Power to make rules.-The Federal Government may make rules to 
carryout the purposes of this Act. 
 
- 10 -
Schedule 
[See sections 2(c) and 11] 
 
 
CODE OF CONDUCT FOR PROTECTION AGAINST HARASSMENT OF 
WOMEN AT THE WORKPLACE 
 
 
Whereas it is expedient to make the Code of Conduct at the Workplace etc to 
provide protection and safety to women against harassment it is hereby provided as 
under: 
 
(i) 
The Code provides a guideline for behavior of all employees, including 
management, and the owners of an organization to ensure a work 
environment free of harassment and intimidation; 
 
(ii) 
“Harassment” means any unwelcome sexual advance, request for sexual 
favors or other verbal or written communication or physical conduct of a 
sexual nature, or sexually demeaning attitudes, causing interference with 
work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile or offensive work 
environment, or the attempt to punish the complainant for refusal to 
comply to such a request or is made a condition for employment; 
The above is unacceptable behavior in the organization and at the 
workplace, including in any interaction or situation that is linked to 
official work or official activity outside the office. 
 
Explanation: 
 
There are three significant manifestations of harassment in the 
work environment: 
 
 
 
(a) 
Abuse of authority 
 
A demand by a person in authority, such as a supervisor, 
for sexual favors in order for the complainant to keep or obtain 
certain job benefits, be it a wage increase, a promotion, training 
opportunity, a transfer or the job itself. 
 
- 11 -
 
 
(b) Creating a hostile environment 
 
Any unwelcome sexual advance, request for sexual favors 
or other verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature, which 
interferes with an individual’s work performance or creates an 
intimidating, hostile, abusive or offensive work environment. 
 
The typical “hostile environment” claim, in general, 
requires finding of a pattern of offensive conduct, however, in 
cases where the harassment is particularly severe, such as in cases 
involving physical contact, a single offensive incident will 
constitute a violation. 
 
 
(c) 
Retaliation 
 
The refusal to grant a sexual favor can result in retaliation, 
which may include limiting the employee’s options for future 
promotions or training, distorting the evaluation reports, generating 
gossip against the employee or other ways of limiting access to 
his/her rights. Such behavior is also a part of the harassment. 
 
(iii) 
An informal approach to resolve a complaint of harassment may be 
through mediation between the parties involved and by providing advice 
and counseling on a strictly confidential basis; 
 
(iv) 
A complainant or a staff member designated by the complainant for the 
purpose may report an incident of harassment informally to her supervisor, 
or a member of the Inquiry Committee, in which case the supervisor or the 
Committee member may address the issue at her discretion in the spirit of 
this Code. The request may be made orally or in writing; 
 
 
- 12 -
(v) 
If the case is taken up for investigation at an informal level, a senior 
manager from the office or the head office will conduct the investigation 
in a confidential manner. The alleged accused will be approached with the 
intention of resolving the matter in a confidential manner; 
 
(vi) 
If the incident or the case reported does constitute harassment of a higher 
degree and the officer or a member reviewing the case feels that it needs to 
be pursued formally for a disciplinary action, with the consent of the 
complainant, the case can be taken as a formal complaint; 
 
(vii) 
A complainant does not necessarily have to take a complaint of 
harassment through the informal channel. She can launch a formal 
complaint at any time; 
 
(viii) The complainant may make formal complaint through her incharge, 
supervisor, CBA nominee or worker's representative, as the case may be, 
or directly to any member of the Inquiry Committee. The Committee 
member approached is obligated to initiate the process of investigation. 
The supervisor shall facilitate the process and is obligated not to cover up 
or obstruct the inquiry; 
 
(ix) 
Assistance in the inquiry procedure can be sought from any member of the 
organization who should be contacted to assist in such a case; 
 
(x) 
The employer shall do its best to temporarily make adjustments so that the 
accused and the complainant do not have to interact for official purposes 
during the investigation period. This would include temporarily changing 
the office, in case both sit in one office, or taking away any extra charge 
over and above their contract which may give one party excessive powers 
over the other's job conditions. The employer can also decide to send the 
accused on leave, or suspend the accused in accordance with the 
applicable procedures for dealing with the cases of misconduct, if 
required; 
 
- 13 -
 
(xi) 
 Retaliation from either party should be strictly monitored. During the 
process of the investigation work, evaluation, daily duties, reporting 
structure and any parallel inquiries initiated should be strictly monitored to 
avoid any retaliation from either side; 
 
(xii) 
The harassment usually occurs between colleagues when they are alone, 
therefore usually it is difficult to produce evidence. It is strongly 
recommended that staff should report an offensive behavior immediately 
to someone they trust, even if they do not wish to make a formal 
complaint at the time. Although not reporting immediately shall not affect 
the merits of the case; and 
 
(xiii) The Code lays down the minimum standards of behavior regarding 
protection of women from harassment at workplace etc but will not affect 
any better arrangement that an organization may have developed nor will 
it bar the grant of protection that employees working in an institute may 
secure from their employers through negotiation. 
 
- 14 -
 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The objective of this Act is to create a safe working environment for women, 
which is free of harassment, abuse and intimidation with a view toward fulfillment of 
their right to work with dignity. It will also enable higher productivity and a better quality 
of life at work. Harassment is one of the biggest hurdles faced by working women 
preventing many who want to work to get themselves and their families out of poverty. 
This Act will open the path for women to participate more fully in the development of 
this country at all levels. 
This Act builds on the principles of equal opportunity for men and women and 
their right to earn a livelihood without fear of discrimination as stipulated in the 
Constitution. This Act complies with the Government’s commitment to high international 
labour standards and empowerment of women. It also adheres to the Human Rights 
Declaration, the United Nation’s Convention for Elimination of all forms of 
Discrimination Against Women and ILO’s convention 100 and 111 on workers’ rights. It 
adheres to the principles of Islam and all other religions in our country which assure 
women’s dignity. 
This Act requires all public and private organizations to adopt an internal Code of 
Conduct and a complain/appeals mechanism aimed at establishing a safe working 
environment, free of intimidation and abuse, for all working women. It shall also 
establish an Ombudsman at Federal and provincial levels. 
 
MINISTER-IN-CHARGE 
YOUSAF RAZA GILLANI 
PRIME MINISTER 
ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF PAKISTAN 
 
 
- 15 -