POLICY GUIDELINES AGAINST
SEXUAL HARASSMENT
IN INSTITUTIONS OF HIGHER LEARNING
fo
Government of Pakistan
Higher Education Commission
Islamabad
Policy Guidelines Against Sexual Harassment in Institutions of Higher Learning
AR SS RS SS AMES EE ESSE EE PVRS AEA SE EE ESE AES RT LR SATA,
TASK FORCE
(For Policy Guidelines Against Sexual Harassment In Institutions Of Higher Learning)
CHAIRPERSON
e Prof. Dr. Najma Najam
MEMBERS
e Prof. Dr. Iftikhar-un Nisa
e Prof. Dr. Perveen Shah
e Mr. Wasim Hashmi Syed
TRANSCRIBERS
e Ms. Mahjabeen Cheema
e Ms. Afsheen Akhter
Higher Education Commission Page i
Policy Guidelines Against Sexual Harassment in Institutions of Higher Learning
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Chairperson and Members of the Task force duly acknowledge and appreciate Higher Education
Commission's initiative of “Policy Guidelines Against Sexual Harassment in Institutions of Higher
Learning’.
A special vote of thanks is in order for all “Higher Education Institutions” of Pakistan for supporting,
reviewing and providing valued insight for the development of the policy guidelines. The students of the
Higher Education Institutions are also thanked for their candid opinion and sharing their experiences on
the subject matter.
Moreover, the international universities (which permitted the review and incorporation of their code of
conduct/policy and procedures on the subject matter) are deeply appreciated for their co-operation.
We also thank the staff of HEC who assisted in preparing, formatting and editing the policy guidelines.
We are especially grateful to Dr. S. Sohail H. Naqvi and the esteemed members of the “Commission” for
their unrelenting support for devising the policy guidelines.
es — Sa es BE
Higher Education Commission Page ii
Policy Guidelines Against Sexual Harassment in Institutions of Higher Learning
STATEMENT BY THE TASK FORCE
We, the members of HEC's Task Force on formulation of guidelines for prevention of sexual harassment
in Higher Educational Institutions ( HEI’s) hereby state for the record that the document was developed
after detailed deliberation and consultation ( with students, faculties, VC’s, HEC members) and was
formulated keeping in view the autonomous organizational and administrative framework of the
Universities of Pakistan as well as the standard practices followed by the universities all over the world. In
view of the “Protection Against Harassment of Women at Workplace Act 2010”, it is strongly felt that it
should be adopted for immediate implementation by the HEl's in its present form.
SSS a a a a
Higher Education Commission Page iii
Policy Guidelines Against Sexual Harassment in Institutions of Higher Learning
COPY RIGHT AND REPRINT PERMISSION
This work is subject to Higher Education Commission Islamabad —Pakistan. All rights are reserved:
whether the whole or part of the material is concerned. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored, or transmitted in any form by any means (including, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording, reprinting, re-use of illustration, broadcasting, reproduction on microfilm, and storage in data
banks). Duplicate of this publication or parts thereof is permitted only under supervision of the Higher
Education Commission |$iamabad- Pakistan Copyright Law. Permission for use must be obtained from
Higher Education Commission |Islamabad-Pakistan. Generally, permission for non-commercial use will
always be granted as long as proper citation acknowledgement credit is given.
a _______i___.—
Higher Education Commission Page iv
Policy Guidelines Against Sexual Harassment in Institutions of Higher Learning
CONTENTS
Clause: Page
Preamble To Guideline ...............ccccccssccceseccssccesseceseeensecesedensesceseeseeaeceseceeeaeeesaeecsanersecearesnasersseesssess 2
t. Policy Statement ...............:..csseeescesssscssecesssseseeseesssessesseeeeseesessenecseesaessescsecseceassesensassessenssseneseensensens 3
2: What ls Sexual Harrassment esiecssescsssssssessccisseossavssrdeswersanesnsueavsavonoeavencanneucenssrenereremmenenreneesennaneearents 4
3 Statement Of Principles .............. eee cceeseeneeseeeeeeeeseneeeeeereescsseessenseeseeseeseveceasersesesenssnsensaseesesnasseess 5
4. In General: Sexual Harrassment Defined ..................eceecceeeseceeeneeeeneeeeeetnaseesnneeseeeeseeeeeseseeeeesesaees 6
5. Listing Of Sexual Harassment In HEI’S............ccececceceeeeeeeeeceeeneeeeeeseteesesseaesaesssessessseaessessesaeeneenenaes 5
6. Sexual Harrassment: Types And Example ..............:cccccecccscesseseeseeeeeneeeseeeeneensessessecsesessessasseeaseaenes 6
7. SUMISCICHION sssccscscsccesesevsssssvesccussarenaseessesxenrsaeresee eccavanesssanencamnsentsneenaoneceeneneumneesenenmmennnengnnnanensennensss: 7
8. Assurance Of Fair Treatment..................c:cccccccssscssecesnecesceessecseeeeeneeestecssueseeeensssensssessasesesorseseseeeess 8
9. Procedures-General Principles For Procedures ..............cccescceeseeeeeesseeeeteseeesenseeseeeseesseasesenseees ens)
102 | ROCOCES sscessccosvcscscsrmeersnasvsnacszieaserenenean suas sexensetbea suanwocnyennaneneeseunscneneorrarenansnncansnemnasennns HaIaSaON SRST aSSREESS 10
41. HEI Office/Harassment Complaint Cell .............. 0... cee cecscsccesseeeeeeseceesessesessnseeessseeeesseeenssneesensesceens 10
12. False Allegation. wiccsscccccssssesevessevsvccssssscsscavscesseavovsvssassacntsesscssseesneveconvenensnassonqesevencnonatoercantgngneensnsenens 11
13. General Procedures For Action By Harassment Monitoring Officer ...............c:c:ceneeeeeeteees 11
14. Consultation With Harassment Monitoring Officer .................:ccccceseeseeseeseeesereseseeseeeesesesetseeeeeneseeeneey 11
15: Sexual Harassment RESO seccscccccceccasexsenesscxcscsvssmssonencoesiowsaeecnnnenniennenennrmmnnnnenansenangrenzezee netted 12
16. Informal Resolution without Written Complaint ................2..ccccccceeeeeseeeeeeteeeeeteeeenneeeeetsseeeteseeenaeeesenes 12
17; Formal Witten Complaints wcvcccsccccssescsssnssccssccicscsasenserasvsscnesssensxswseenestavenneenamnesnoennnennnenneneneraeenenenmannees 13
18. Informal Resolution With A Written Complaint ................2-cccccceccceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeteeeeneecesseenseeesseesseeeeeeees 13
19. Formal Resolution With A Written Complaint..;.....2......0:c0cccicccccsecessecavenssecsassereaensaseranneeseneeenesenes 14
20. Hearing Panel For Sexual Harassment ...............ccccccssccccssessceseeneeneereensenseneenenerennnensenssnensneseeeeererens 14
21.. Selection:Of The Tribunal .........-c--.:..cccseneaanconrnsrereenanenenseraonenstssnncdenccossuedaunes sey seesssanacawbues ecadesueseateas 15
22. Procedural Rules For Formal Hearings. 0siissiscssuscsssesssssssassesossnucccsventssseacssnannenesesnennmenenesnarnensenenes 15
23. Parties To the Hearing.................csecsserersescesssssescenteneerseseaccssecernccenrscenntesnatesensevedasersovsgpocssevadaebaaes 16
24. SCHEGUING scccscsmssccsccsccencanmenenara teers ener ae rsennie recommen ns eENeeNS 16
25. Notice Of Hearing ..........ccccccccccccecccceeseeeseeesnsssesseseseseseeeseseeneeeneneeeeees exrnsssonsnmmararesnssamssoananna se senanseetei 16
26.. REGOPMOP MEANING ..........--:nrcencorsrnerarnnrannennsenrsennanesd ths SRAIEE DSS DEURSSESURR ONC URU INES UeRERRRN ENTS aENNANCNNCETTETTIEK 16
27. Duties: Of The Tribunal Chait ..iscccscssssoscsccccosesecasvseseeecseassworsecsvsnucvessascesccsaans suancacesnssenueanecenecnmeereasons 16
DE. ‘GOUTSEN eesccarsssisvnsaveocceesstenneocnsnexonceneennvenswnnennecemocven snebeerns womeronnsnansnenseenar sna eccasomnsiteesnateieeesss WENO 17
29 ‘CloSGd HOANING venereum rcermnccserscrnaenswesoarmer oneneus wre neen ir mvsaamcassmesmunsieemmeennier Tom nrnsmenEets 17
30. Order Of Proceedings ............cceececccescseesseeseeesecseesseneeeeecessessessccesesersceeseaeenseenerseaeenaeeasenseeneeeneeeaeeee® 17
BT. ‘WiIRESSES........-.cc.mecconsserssncererenennisslibbshitserenennnndadssaseeieaaK Gusse ee Steaua a Ses teRUes ON SRNN ER NEEURTIN TORRES 17
32. | EVID ONCE scccensonescenessussssamvecusssrneversssureneeran ania maa ea rrTanasmmvseruecanmnveenaanceamnerorosanentaesponetaceres 18
33. Deliberations By The Tribunal ............ cc ccc cccccesescceeecescescenseeseeeeseeessesecseeeeeeneeeeeneeteeetetnaeentenseens 18
34. ‘Sanctions And Remedies..............0s3ii-5.-..-.-.-0.sssseans teers eee te ee esos oer ETO 19
Bo LSD foc) ey (Sa sere ng cp ne re a eRe er 19
36. Edlication For PreventiOny..........--..cece-smnrnsse-nnnsenesnensinhsdsnan aun aussseviAipsE UNC WAG ONT TE ROHNERT ITER TERNER 20
37. Consensual Relationship Between HE! Community ....................cccccccesscesceseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeenaeeneeeneeens 20
38. .AdDeal: MEGRAMISIN: ......--.cricronrnnrsennesenranrnsnntarasnanenennanvensnaroonseanean nnsonaennasendancgnessanacdsabeaursshaseanye tenes 20
a mS LD LIES LAI
Higher Education Commission Page v
Policy Guidelines Against Sexual Harassment in Institutions of Higher Learning
PREAMBLE TO GUIDELINES
HEl’s are dedicated to the pursuit and dissemination of knowledge. Their members enjoy certain rights
and privileges essential to these twin objectives. Central among these rights and privileges is the
freedom, within the law, to pursue what seem to them fruitful avenues of inquiry; to teach and to learn
unhindered by external or non-academic constraints; and to engage in full and unrestricted consideration
of any opinion. This freedom extends not only to members of the HEl’s but to all who are invited to
participate in its forum. All members of the HEI’s must recognize this fundamental principle and must
share responsibility for supporting, safeguarding and preserving this central freedom. Behavior which
obstructs free and full discussion, not only of ideas which are safe and accepted but of those which may
be unpopular or even abhorrent, vitally threatens the integrity of the HEI, and cannot be tolerated.
Suppression of academic freedom would prevent the HEI from carrying out its primary functions. In
particular, as an autonomous institution HEI is protected from any efforts by the state or its agents to limit
or suppress academic freedom. Likewise, neither officers of the HEI nor private individuals may limit or
suppress academic freedom.
The common good of society depends upon the search for knowledge and its free exposition. Academic
freedom does not require neutrality on the part of the individual; on the contrary, academic freedom
makes commitment to a position or course of action possible. Academic freedom carries with it the duty to
use that freedom in a manner consistent with the scholarly obligation to base research and teaching on
an honest search for knowledge.
Ideally, the Higher Education Institutes (HEIs) are places where administrators, faculty, employee/staff,
and students (all levels/categories) work and learn in an environment free from intimidating, offensive,
and hostile behaviors. Sexual harassment vitiates such an environment. Therefore, each member of the
HEI campuses must have mechanisms to provide their members with the opportunity to develop
intellectually, professionally, personally, ethically, morally and socially in an environment free of
intimidation and harassment.
Higher Education Commission Page 2
Policy Guidelines Against Sexual Harassment in Institutions of Higher Learning
1.0 POLICY STATEMENT
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1 f
1.8
1.9
Sexual harassment is prohibited at HEI and constitutes a punishable offence under this
policy
In much as sexual harassment is demeaning to human dignity and is unacceptable in a
healthy work environment specifically one in which scholarly pursuit may flourish, HEI will
not tolerate the sexual harassment of any member of the HEI community and will strive
through education and deterrence to create an environment free from such behavior on
its premises.
HEI affirms the right of every member of its constituencies to live, study and work in an
environment that is free from sexual harassment. Behavior constituting sexual
harassment as defined in this document is incompatible with standards of professional
ethics and with behavior appropriate to an institution of higher learning.
HEI recognizes that as an academic and free community it must uphold its fundamental
commitments to academic freedom along with freedom of expression and association. It
will maintain an environment in which students and teaching and non-teaching staff can
engage in free enquiry and open discussion of all issues without intimidation and
harassment of others. The Harassment Monitoring Officer, like all other officers of the
HEI, is obliged to uphold the same principles.
An academic and free community must also include freedom of movement and freedom
of access to facilities and resources without fear of harassment, discrimination or
violence
All persons entrusted with authority by the HEI have a particular obligation to ensure that
there is no misuse of that authority in any action or relationship.
Sexual harassment is a serious human rights issue. It can be exacerbated by
discrimination on other grounds of vulnerability such as gender, poverty, disability, race,
religion, ethnic origin or sexual orientation.
The HEI recognizes its legal and moral responsibility to protect all of its members from
sexual harassment and to take action if such harassment does occur. To these ends it
has developed a policy on, and procedures for, dealing with complaints of sexual
harassment, including a range of disciplinary measures up to and including dismissal. It
has also established an educational program to prevent incidents of sexual harassment
The HEI prohibits reprisal or threats of reprisal against any member of the HEI
community who makes use of this policy or participates in proceedings held under its
jurisdiction. Any individual or body found to be making such reprisals or threats will be
subject to disciplinary action
The intention of this policy and its procedures is to prevent sexual harassment from
taking place, and where necessary to act upon complaints of sexual harassment
promptly, fairly, judiciously and with due regard to confidentiality for all parties concerned.
All administrators, deans, managers, department chairs, directors of schools or programs
and others in supervisory or leadership positions have an obligation to be familiar with
and to uphold this policy and its procedures along with informing members of their staff
about its existence
Notwithstanding this policy, individuals have the right to seek the advice and services of
the Higher Education Commission's cell for prevention of sexual harassment.
All the actions categorized as sexual harassment when done physically or verbally would
also be considered as sexual harassment when done using electronic media such as
computers, mobiles, internet, e-mails etc.
a ________
Higher Education Commission Page 3
Policy Guidelines Against Sexual Harassment in Institutions of Higher Learning
2.0 WHAT IS SEXUAL HARASSMENT?
Sexual harassment is a reality which occurs in the classrooms, offices, research laboratories, and
HEI environment in general. Sexual harassment may be overt or subtle, and can range from
visual signals or gestures to verbal abuse to physical contact along with hand or sign language to
denote sexual activity, persistent and unwelcome flirting. Sexual Harassment generally takes
place when there is power or authority difference among persons involved (Student/Teacher,
Employee/Supervisor, Junior Teacher/Senior Teacher, Research Supervisee/Supervisor).
Further, this also involves treating others unequally on the basis of gender in work-related or
academic duties or programs and not providing female students with the same academic
opportunities as male students or vice versa; this is also applicable to same sex harassment
(male /male, female/female)
The types of behavior constituting sexual harassment may vary in degree of severity. Its definition
always has one key element: the behavior is uninvited, unwanted, and unwelcomed.
Sexual harassment in higher education is not a new issue, but has until recently been a hidden
silent one. During the last few years, HEI personnel from administrators and faculty to employees
and students have recognized the problem in terms of its lost productivity, time consumption, and
legal implications (in addition to visible/invisible damage to the victim).
In institutions of higher “education, both the offender and the offender's
Supervisors/Chairperson/Directors/institutional Heads can be held liable for acts of sexual
harassment.
As HEI, its employees, and students must be aware of the need for freedom of inquiry and
openness of discussion in its educational and research programs where they must also strive to
create and maintain an atmosphere of intellectual decorum and mutual tolerance in which these
essential features of academic life can thrive. No HEI can or should guarantee that every idea ex-
pressed in its classrooms or laboratories will be inoffensive to all; pursued seriously, education
and scholarship necessarily entail raising questions about received opinions and conventional
interpretations. HEI does guarantee, however, that credible accusations of inappropriate sexual
remarks or actions will be investigated promptly, thoroughly, and fairly
Once a person in a position of authority at an HEI has knowledge, or should have had
knowledge, of conduct constituting sexual harassment, the HEI is exposed to liability.
Therefore, any administrator, supervisor, manager or faculty member who is aware of
sexual harassment and condones it, by action or inaction, would be held responsible for
negligence towards maintaining sexual harassment free campus.
In contrast with sexually harassing conduct, personal relationships among consenting adults of
the HEI community which do not breach the social and cultural norms of the society and occur
outside the HEI’s working environment are, in general, a private matter. There are occasions,
however, when the interests of the HEI may be seriously implicated in these relationships,
particularly where the HEI relies on its employees to make judgments about others. If two people
are in a sexual relationship and in a student/ academic staff member or supervisee/supervisor
relationship, then they must take steps to ensure that the conflict of interest created by such a
situation is removed in all evaluations. Supervisors should never evaluate alone the work
performance/promotion/annual evaluation of those with whom they are involved in intimate
relationships. If they fail to take such steps and a conflict of interest is created, this will be a
violation of the HEI's Code of Ethics.
In Pakistani Universities relationships with a difference in power and authority can seriously affect
the institutional working as well as the credibility of all involved.
a
Higher Education Commission Page 4
Policy Guidelines Against Sexual Harassment in Institutions of Higher Learning
3.0 STATEMENT OF PRINCIPLES
Sexual harassment is offensive sexual behavior by persons in authority towards those who
can be benefitted or injured in an official capacity. Therefore, it is primarily an issue of abuse
of power, not sex.
Sexual harassment is a breach of a trusting relationship that should be a sex-neutral and
relaxed situation. It is unprofessional conduct and undermines the integrity of the employment
relationship.
Sexual harassment is coercive behavior, whether implied or actual. It is unwanted attention
and intimacy in a nonreciprocal relationship.
Sexual harassment is a violation of professional ethics.
4.0 IN GENERAL: SEXUAL HARASSMENT DEFINED
Unwanted sexual advances;
Unwelcome requests for sexual favors; and
Other behavior of a sexual nature where:
A. Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or condition of an
individual's employment or participation in a HEl-sponsored educational program or
activity;
B. Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used as a basis for
academic or employment decisions affecting that individual;
C. Such conduct has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with an individual's
academic or work performance, or of creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive
educational or working environment.
5.0 LISTING OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT IN HEI’S
(Actual reported cases)
Asking female students to visit personal offices of their supervisors/authorities in-charge
after office hours to discuss their grades and assignments.
Asking female students to meet supervisors/authorities in-charge out of the HEI premises
with the promise of improvement in grades.
Financial and sexual gratification from graduate students (PhD, MPhil, Masters) by their
supervisors.
Intimidation of faculty/staff by students/colleagues in order to tarnish the reputation
(character assassination) of faculty/staff.
Harassment by senior students of the junior students, female students or minority
students.
Unwelcome sexual advances —whether they involve physical touching or not;
Sexual epithets, jokes, written or oral references to sexual conduct, gossip regarding one’s
sex life;
re a Se
Higher Education Commission Page 5
Policy Guidelines Against Sexual Harassment in Institutions of Higher Learning
e Comment on an individual's body, comment about an individual's sexual activity, deficiencies,
or prowess; Displaying sexually suggestive objects, pictures, or cartoons;
e Unwelcome staring, whistling, brushing against the body, sexual gestures, or suggestive or
insulting comments
e Inquiries into one’s sexual experiences; and
e Discussion of one’s sexual activities (even if males are discussing this, it is done deliberately
in front of female students or colleagues)
e Using derogatory abuses which refer to mother or sister bodies
e Acts of sexual connotation relating to the same, as a common usage in conversation
e Forcing students to publish their research work in Supervisor's name
6.0 SEXUAL HARASSMENT: TYPES AND EXAMPLES
(Actual reported cases)
6.1 By Teacher
e Male Teacher asked the Female student, if you want “A” grade, you need to take your final
exam at my home.
e Male head of the department forced the female subordinate employee that if she wants her
contract extended she needs to spend time with him after office hours
e Male HOD deliberately touching or hitting the body of female employee by file or pen/pencil.
e Male Teacher's referring to female bodies and reproductive cycles to embarrass female
students during class lectures.
e Various complaints recorded of staring at female students especially at their bodies
e Needy female students were given financial support by Faculty member in exchange for
sexual favors
e Students complaints of teacher telling vulgar jokes during classes which have sexual
innuendos
e Complaints against male supervisor/teacher spending long hours locked away in office with a
young female colleague or student
6.2 By Students
e Female student dressing or behaving provocatively while in a meeting or in the presence of
the male faculty or supervisor in a one-to-one situation.
e Female student asked the teacher to provide the final grade list of all students. When the
teacher refused to do that, the student registered a complaint against the teacher that he tried
to hold her hand in parking lot while asking her to meet in private for grade list.
e Female student visiting male teacher in his office unnecessarily and spending long hours and
initiating intimacy for benefits (of grades, employment or even monetary).
e Students sending in written notes, letters, emails with requests for intimacy- in exchange for
grades
e Character assassination of female teachers to gain political, academic, or financial gains
(case of specific HEI teacher who was removed from duty because of harassment by
politically motivated students).
Higher Education Commission Page 6
Policy Guidelines Against Sexual Harassment in Institutions of Higher Learning
|S SS SS a ST
e Dressing culturally inappropriately to emphasize body parts ( both males/females)
6.3 By Employees
e Using vulgar language to address females (student, faculty and other employees)
e To touch their intimate parts in the presence of women
e Younger faculty member was blocked by Dean of the relevant faculty to get higher education
(PhD/Phil).
e Junior faculty was transferred to other department against their will by the authorities as
punitive measure for not complying with undue request for (sexual) favors
e Administrative Staff asking the female students to pay them for providing the students for
their documents in time,
e Giving extra favors to young female faculty/staff in nominating their names for
international/domestic trips for their attention.
e Threatening the females students by using forge/fake documents and pictures to black mail
them into compliance.
e Anonymous _letters/pamphlets/e-mails defaming or character assassinating of
employees/teachers/students.
e Providing material to newspaper/magazine to tarnish the reputation § of
faculty/employee/students.
7.0 JURISDICTION
7.1 For the purpose of this policy, members of the HEI! are defined as all administrative,
research, teaching and non-teaching employees of the HEI as well as students (including
interns and residents) of the HEI. It is mandatory to treat all complaints and identity of
complainants as highly confidential where high confidentiality shall be maintained
throughout the process.
¥.2 This policy applies to all members of the HE] community, to those with whom the HEl
does business and to any person on HEI property (including contractors who are involved
in any business- catering, hostels, or construction etc)
7.3 This policy affects the terms and conditions of employment of faculty of the HEI. As such,
it is subject to discussion and/or approval in accordance with the HEI policy entitled, the
final decision would rest with the HEI authority as designated in the Act and Statutes
74 Nothing in this policy is meant to supersede the terms and conditions of any collective
agreement, or any other contractual agreement, entered into by the HEI and its
employees
ta The following individuals or bodies may initiate a complaint:
7.5.1. Any member of the HEI, on his or her own behalf.
7.5.2 |The HEI, on behalf of one of its members
7.5.3. Persons seeking to become members of the HEI in circumstances directly
affecting their application to become a member
7.5.4 Former members of the HEI in circumstances directly affecting their dismissal or
withdrawal from the HEI
7.5.5 Individuals employed by companies holding contracts with the HE! while fulfilling
the terms of the contract; or
SS + SE TT SS EE BEE EE RT ET SNE EO TE LT TE EEE SE LE LS ET
Higher Education Commission Page 7
Policy Guidelines Against Sexual Harassment in Institutions of Higher Learning
7.5.6 Invited visitors.
The following individuals or bodies may be the subject of a complaint:
a. Any member(s) or employee(s) of the HEI; or
b. Others on HEI property.
Complaints may be made about any alleged violation of this policy that takes place on
HEI premises, be they rented or owned, or in the course of any activities conducted by or
on behalf of the HEI! on other premises.
The HEI will inform all external agencies who do business on the HE! campus of the
existence of the Sexual Harassment Policy.
Students engaged in HEl-sanctioned academic activities on premises off- campus
(placement, internship, practicum, research) will have access to the provisions of the
policies of the hiring or supervisory agencies, where such policies exist, and/or of the
HEC. Students at off-campus placements may seek advice from the HEI Sexual
Harassment Office.
8.0 ASSURANCE OF FAIR TREATMENT
8.1
8.2
8.3
The complainant, the respondent, and any other parties to proceedings under this policy
are to be treated fairly
This may involve the making of special arrangements, two examples of which are
described below
Where the complainant at the time of making a compiaint is either a student or instructor
of the respondent, the HEI may, in appropriate circumstances, after the respondent has
been informed that a complaint has been made, and after receiving recommendations
from the Harassment Monitoring Officer, make arrangements with the appropriate
administrator for certain work and examinations of the student to be supervised and
evaluated by a neutral person
Where the complainant is a staff member whose performance is normally evaluated by
the respondent, the complainant is to receive fair employment treatment and protection
from adverse employment-related consequences during the procedures of this policy. To
that end, the HEI may, after the respondent have been informed that a complaint has
been made, and in consultation with the complainant:
8.4.1 have the complainant's performance assessed by another administrator, where
practicable
8.4.2 _ temporarily reassign the complainant until the complaint is resolved; or
8.4.3 Delay the complainant's performance appraisal and/or awarding of merit pay until
the complaint is resolved, in which case subsequent payment for merit shall be
retroactive to the date it would normally have been received and interest shall be
paid on the amount owed.
These assurances shall also be offered to any witnesses in a case.
Should any special arrangement of the type described in clause 8.2 above be required,
the Harassment Monitoring Officer shall, after the respondent has been informed that a
complaint has been made, make the request for the special arrangement of the
appropriate HEI administrator, and shall provide the administrator with any details of the
complaint necessary to enable the administrator to decide what special arrangements are
appropriate. The administrator shall treat in confidence all information provided by the
Harassment Monitoring Officer.
SS SS Se a a SES ES SR
Higher Education Commission Page 8
Policy Guidelines Against Sexual Harassment in Institutions of Higher Learning
9.0 PROCEDURES - GENERAL PRINCIPLES FOR PROCEDURES
9.1
9.2
9.3
9.4
9.5
9.6
97
9.8
9.9
9.10
All persons who allege gender discrimination or sexual harassment under the provisions
of this policy must be advised to contact the Harassment Monitoring Officer (HMO). This
provision will ensure that all such complainants will have access to a common source of
consistent and expert advice and that reliable data may be gathered on the incidence of
discrimination and harassment in the HEI community. In the event that a complainant is
reluctant to contact the Officer, the complainant may contact a trained or qualified
individual or the employment supervisor, manager, Department Chair or Dean. It will be
the responsibility of the individual contacted to report the case to the Harassment
Monitoring Officer without identifying either the complainant or the alleged offender and to
ask for advice on procedure and policy from the Officer to effect a solution, if a solution is
necessary.
In the event that the actual case is not referred to the Harassment Monitoring Officer, the
individual responsible for the case shall adhere as closely as possible to the policies and
procedures of this documant. If a complainant chooses not to consult the Officer, but
wishes a formal hearing, the complainant shall be directed to file a written request with
the secretary of the Syndicate/Executive Council/Board of Governors.
The Harassment Monitoring Officer (HMO) is an employee of the HEI. He/She will be
appointed by Syndicate/Executive Council/Board of Governors where he/she is
responsible for the application of this policy as herein defined. To this end, the Officer will
develop tools/techniques/procedures educational programs by consulting HEI’s authority
and experts to promote awareness of sexual harassment, and to foster an environment
free of sexual harassment in the HEI community, and will carry out complaint resolution.
The Harassment Monitoring Officer shall act as an impartial counselor and advisor to any
member of the HEI community and maintain a fair and unbiased attitude to all complaints,
and to all parties to complaints, at all times. He/She will have a minimum experience of
10 years of service within HEIs and bear sound reputation.
Confidentiality shall be enjoined on the Harassment Monitoring Officer, and supervisory
personne! working in concert with the Harassment Monitoring Officer. This does not
preclude the discreet disclosure of information in order to elicit the facts of the case, or to
implement and monitor properly the terms of any resolution.
The Harassment Monitoring Officer and supervisory personnel working in concert with
the Harassment Monitoring Officer will be subject to administrative disciplinary action for
inappropriate breaches of confidentiality on their part.
Should the complainant, with respect to the subject matter of a complaint being dealt with
under this policy, prefers to seek redress in the courts, proceedings under this policy will
be permanently discontinued and any new proceedings under this policy in relation to the
incident in question will be barred.
The complainant and the respondent may at any stage of any of the procedures outlined
in this policy be represented and/or accompanied by another person of her/his choice.
Failure to comply with a resolution agreed upon or imposed as a result of the procedures
within this policy may result in disciplinary action by the HEI.
If, during the informal stages of complaint resolution, the Harassment Monitoring Officer
determines that the complaint is frivolous, vexatious or entirely without factual basis, the
Officer will advise the complainant and the respondent (if previously informed of the
complaint) of this fact, in writing, and will provide reasons for this conclusion. The Officer
will advise the complainant that should a tribunal eventually hear the matter, and come to
the same conclusion, the complainant could be subject to disciplinary actions under this
policy. At this point, the Harassment Monitoring Officer's involvement in the case shall
cease.
Teaching, research and non-teaching staff who participate in the procedures outlined in
this policy shall be given released time to consult with the Harassment Monitoring Officer
Higher Education Commission Page 9

Policy Guidelines Against Sexual Harassment in Institutions of Higher Learning
and attend formal hearings pertaining to their case. Students will be assisted in adjusting
schedules as necessary to attend their formal hearings.
9.11 Should the Officer believe at any time that the health or safety of members of the HEI
community is at risk, the Officer may notify the Director of Security Services and the
appropriate administrative officer of the HEI. In a situation where there is threat to either
of the two (complainant and respondent) or the monitoring officer, the campus security
services and resident officer/director security of the campus need to be alerted.
9.12 Noone shall be compelled to proceed with a complaint.
RECORDS
10.1. All notes pertaining to advice sought by persons wishing merely to consult with the
Officer, or arising from procedures of an Informal Resolution Without A Written Complaint
(see clause 14.0), shall be maintained in a confidential file for a period of three years for
students and permanent record/dossier of the employee of the HEI from the date of the
complainant's initial contact with Harassment Monitoring Officer.
10.2 All records pertaining to procedures involving an Informal Resolution with a Written
Complaint (see clauses 18.0), or Formal Resolution (see clauses 17.0 to 33.9), shall be
maintained permanently in a confidential file. Any record of a Written Complaint
necessitates notification of the respondent. The respondent must be allowed an
opportunity to respond to the complaint and to have that response form part of the case.
10.3. The notes/records in (10.1), and (10.2) above shall be maintained by the Harassment
Monitoring Officer. No one other than the Harassment Monitoring Officer shall have
access to the records in (10.1) and (10.2) above, except as otherwise provided for in this
policy.
HE! OFFICE /HARASSMENT COMPLAINT CELL
11.1. Objectives:
The primary purpose of specialized office or cell is to facilitate the policy implementation in letter
and spirit. Universities are to set up Offices / Harassment Complaint Cell, where complaints of
sexual harassment or any other forms of harassment could be lodged. This would require a team
consisting of a full time trained professional designated Harassment Monitoring Officer (Gender
sensitized, with strong professional and counseling skills), computer specialist, and assistant who
could follow up the documentation through relevant offices. It is appropriate that one of the senior
members be female in order to facilitate confidential communication.
The Harassment Complaint Cell would involve the following:
a. Sensitization of all university faculty, staff, students to sexual harassment through
workshops and training. All personnel/staff/faculty that enter the university employment
would require completing a two-three day essential sensitization training programs. This
would be an ongoing activity
b. Complaint registration: Formal verbal or written complaint could be lodged in this office,
as a first and preliminary step. Resolution through counseling can take place at this first
step. However, if the complainant wishes to follow through the hearing and tribunal
procedures, he/she would be required to fill a complaint form that would be available in
the cell.
G: Tracking system: Once the complaint has formally been lodged, it would be entered into
the database to track the processing of the complaint. It is important that every complaint
be treated with utmost confidence and is sent to the concerning authorities/vice
chancellor for further orders/inquiries. The preliminary investigation reports should also
be uploaded into the database against every reference filed case to facilitate the entire
investigation procedure.
SS SE SE
Higher Education Commission Page 10
Policy Guidelines Against Sexual Harassment in Institutions of Higher Learning
d. Implementation: Since the investigation of such cases requires a constant liaison
between the appointed authority/committee and the complainant therefore all the
meetings and schedule arranged would be the responsibility of cell.
12.0 FALSE ALLEGATION
13.0
Allegations of sexual harassment made out of malice or intent to hurt the reputation of the
persons against whom the complaint is filed are to be dealt with as serious offences. Making
malafide allegation of sexual harassment knowing it to be false, whether in a formal or informal
context, is a serious offense under this policy and action would be taken under the University
disciplinary regulations/ as per provisions of the University ACT.
Any Charge found to have been intentionally dishonest or made in willful disregard of the truth,
and to malign or damage the reputation however, will subject the complainant (student, staff or
faculty) to severe disciplinary action.
Withdrawal of a false complaint after a wide dissemination of, or publicity of the purported offense
carried out intentionally to malign the character of the person accused, and done with willful intent
to cause physical, psychological or mental harm or stress has to be dealt with more serious
penalties. This will ensure that no injustice is meted out.
GENERAL PROCEDURES FOR ACTION BY HARASSMENT MONITORING
OFFICER (HMO)
13.1. If the Harassment Monitoring Officer receives repeated allegations of offenses against
the same person but each of the persons making allegations is unwilling to file a written
complaint and appear as complainant, and if circumstances are considered by the
Harassment Monitoring Officer to be such that a complaint should be lodged, the Officer
shall inform the highest authority of the HEI or in case of Rector/Vice
Chancellor/President/Head of the Institution, to the next highest.
13.2 The Harassment Monitoring Officer shall communicate with persons drawn from the
pertinent notes/records, who might provide evidence of discrimination or harassment, to
determine their willingness to provide testimony if the HEI were to proceed as a
complainant against the alleged harasser. The Officer shall not communicate the
contents of the notes to such persons in either written or verbal form.
13.3. The Harassment Monitoring Officer shall provide to the appropriate senior
authorities/officers mentioned in Clause 13.1 the names of witnesses who agree to
testify, the name of the alleged respondent and copies of any written complaints and
responses submitted to the Officer relating to alleged offence(s) by the respondent.
13.4 The appropriate senior authorities/officers mentioned in Clause 13.1 shall communicate
with the witnesses and the alleged respondent, review all the information and decide (as
soon as possible but no later than six weeks from the date of receiving the information)
whether to initiate formal procedures against the respondent (see clause 17.0) The
Harassment Monitoring Officer shall be informed in writing of the senior
authorities/officers’ decision. If the senior authorities/officers decide to initiate formal
proceedings against the respondent, such proceedings normally should be initiated within
one month of making the decision.
CONSULTATION WITH HARASSMENT MONITORING OFFICER
14.1. Persons having reason to believe that they have been subjected to sexual harassment
are strongly encouraged to contact the Harassment Monitoring Officer as soon as
possible. Through consultation, the Harassment Monitoring Officer will assist in
determining if the reported events constitute discrimination or harassment under the
provisions of this policy, and delineate options for action available to that individual.
Persons seeking advice at this stage need not reveal their names or the name(s) of the
a a ST SL ELSE,
Higher Education Commission Page 11
14.2
14.3
14.4
14.5
Policy Guidelines Against Sexual Harassment in Institutions of Higher Learning
other person(s) concerned. The Officer will keep confidential records of all consultations
(see clause 10).
In cases the Officer deems to be appropriate, the Officer, or a suitably trained alternate
appointed by the Officer, may investigate allegations made under this policy in order to:
14.2.1 assist in the resolution of the matter in the informal stage
14.2.2 decide whether to make a recommendation that the HEI proceed as complainant;
or
14.2.3 Proceed by way of fact-finding investigation.
Where provisions for dealing with sexual harassment are contained in a collective
agreement, the terms of that collective agreement will be applicable. In the event of
conflicting jurisdictions between the complainant and the respondent, the procedure
governing the respondent shall be followed. The Harassment Monitoring Officer shall
remain available to provide counsel and advice.
Where complaints fall outside the jurisdiction of this policy (e.g., co-op placement,
internship, practicum), the Harassment Monitoring Officer will direct the complainant to
the appropriate resolution process and will remain available as an adviser (see clauses
7.7 and 8.1)
The HEI prohibits reprisal or threats of reprisal against any member of the HE! community
who makes use of this policy or participates in proceedings held under its jurisdiction.
Any individual or body found to make such reprisals or threats of reprisal will be subject
to disciplinary action.
15.0 SEXUAL HARASSMENT RESOLUTION
15.1
15.2
15.3
The objective of sexual harassment resolution is to secure a settlement that is consistent
with the spirit of this policy and its fundamental principles.
Resolution may be pursued through three progressive levels, "Informal Resolution
Without a Written Complaint", "Informal Resolution With a Written Complaint" and
"Formal Resolution With a Written Complaint". The Harassment Monitoring Officer will
normally encourage all complainants to seek resolution through informal means instead
of, or prior to, proceeding to the process of formal complaint resolution. This does not
preclude a complainant's requesting to bypass informal procedures and move directly to
formal resolution (see clause 19.0).
Any complainant who requests Informal Resolution with a Written Complaint or Formal
Resolution with a Written Complaint must be prepared to be identified to the respondent.
This policy does not, however, prevent anyone from seeking counseling or advice on a
confidential basis from the Harassment Monitoring Officer
16.0 INFORMAL RESOLUTION WITHOUT A WRITTEN COMPLAINT
16.1
16.2
The primary objective of most people who seek the assistance of the Harassment
Monitoring Officer is to stop the offending behavior. To this end, it is important to provide
for the option of Informal Resolution facilitated by the Harassment Monitoring Officer.
Each situation is unique and creativity may be necessary in devising options for Informal
Resolution. No third party will be informed of the identity of the respondent unless and
until the respondent is informed of the complaint and given an opportunity to respond,
The Officer will keep confidential records of all Informal Resolutions (see clause 10.1).
After consulting with the Harassment Monitoring Officer or after attempting Informal
.Resolution Without A Written Complaint, the complainant may decide:
I. to take no further action; or
Il. to proceed with the formulation of a written complaint
—————
Higher Education Commission Page 12
Policy Guidelines Against Sexual Harassment in Institutions of Higher Learning
17.0 FORMAL WRITTEN COMPLAINTS
Nt
17.2
17.3
17.4
17.5
A complainant may file a signed, written complaint of breach of this policy to be dealt with
informally. The written complaint should be filed with the Harassment Monitoring Officer
or, in the event that the complainant chooses to contact another HEI officer (see clause
9.1), with that other officer
A written complaint shall be submitted promptly, preferably within 3 months but no later
than 12 months from the last date of the alleged harassment. An extension of up to 3
months may be granted by the Officer or other HEI officer where appropriate, upon
written request. Any further extension may be granted at the discretion of the Officer or
other HEI official only after hearing submissions from both the person seeking an
extension in order to make a complaint, and from the potential respondent.
The written complaint shall include the dates of the alleged incident(s), the names of the
people involved in the incident(s) and a full description of the incident(s).
The respondent shall be provided with a copy of the complaint, disclosure of all material
facts relevant to the complaint, and an opportunity to respond orally or in writing to the
written complaint. The respondent is to be provided with ongoing disclosure of the
particulars of the complaint as they become known.
No information regarding the complaint will be given to any party unless the respondent
has been notified of the complaint, as required by sub-section (17.4) above.
18.0 INFORMAL RESOLUTION WITH A WRITTEN COMPLAINT
18.1
18.2
18.3
18.4
18.5
18.6
If the complainant elects to proceed by way of Informa! Resolution with a Written
Complaint, the Harassment Monitoring Officer shall discuss the written complaint and any
response with the complainant and with the respondent with a view to reaching a
resolution acceptable to all parties.
It is expected that Informal Procedures shall be conducted at a reasonable pace, but
shall not normally extend past 30 days from submission of the written complaint.
Once the procedure of Informal Resolution With A Written Complaint is initiated by the
complainant, and once the respondent has been notified of the complaint and has been
given a chance to respond to it, the Harassment Monitoring Officer , after consultation
with the complainant, may contact persons with authority over the respondent, or with
jurisdiction over the place or context in which the alleged harassment occurred, if
alternative arrangements as provided for in section 8.5 are required, or to elicit the facts
of the case.
If a resolution is achieved through Informal Procedures, a Resolution Report prepared by
the Officer shall be signed by the complainant and the respondent. Should the resolution
include an action or remedy by the HEI, that aspect of the Resolution Report must also
be agreed to, signed and, with respect to that aspect, enforced by the member of the HEI
Administration with the authority for ensuring that the remedy is imposed or enforced. All
parties shall receive a copy of the report and a copy shall be retained in the Officer's
confidential files (see clause 10.2).
Should the Officer determine that the possibility of reaching a resolution through Informal
Procedures has been exhausted; both the complainant and the respondent shall be
informed of the same in writing within 5 working days.
Following notification that Informal Procedures have been exhausted, the complainant
shall then be advised to:
i. request, in writing, a formal hearing; or
ii. withdraw, in writing, the complaint.
Higher Education Commission Page 13
Policy Guidelines Against Sexual Harassment in Institutions of Higher Learning
18.7. Should the complainant withdraw the complaint, the report noted in clause 18.2 will
remain in the Officer's confidential files for a period of 7 years (see clause 10.2). Both
the complainant and the respondent will be notified that the records will remain in the
Officer's files for seven years. Should the complainant request a formal hearing, this
request will be forwarded to the Secretary of the Board of Governors. Attached to the
request will be a copy of the original written complaint and any written response from the
respondent.
18.8 If the complainant has neither written to the Officer to initiate a formal hearing nor written
to withdraw the complaint within 30 working days of being notified in writing that informal
resolution has failed, the complaint shall lapse.
18.9 Upon receipt of a written complaint, the Harassment Monitoring Officer , or other HEI
officer where appropriate, shall determine whether the complainant wishes first to
proceed by way of the "Informal Resolution With a Written Complaint" procedure or
whether the complainant wishes directly to proceed with the "Formal Resolution"
procedure.
19.0 FORMAL RESOLUTION WITH A WRITTEN COMPLAINT
General Considerations
19.1. If a complainant requests a formal hearing, the complainant and any witnesses must be
prepared to be identified to the respondent.
19.2 If a complaint has reached the stage of a formal hearing, the respondent is entitled to a
specific disposition of the issue; or, where the complaint is withdrawn once a formal
hearing has begun but before it has concluded, to a dismissal of the compiaint.
19.3. Where a complainant alleges that an incident raises a breach under both the Sexual
Harassment and the Anti-Discrimination Policies, the complaint will be dealt with in a
single hearing by the same tribunal appointed under both policies.
19.4 No reprisal against complainant as there is a possibility of further victimization or
hindrance in launching a complaint
19.5 Retaliation or any other action against complainant of sexual harassment is to be taken
seriously under the provisions of this policy. The retaliation against those who
° File a sexual harassment complaint or testify, assist, or participate in an
investigation/proceedings related to such a complaint.
° Oppose conduct which constitutes sexual harassment even if formal complaint
has not been lodged.
All allegations of retaliation would be investigated formally under the purview of this
policy, and if substantiated, would result in appropriate disciplinary action.
20.0 HEARING PANEL FOR SEXUAL HARASSMENT
20.1 Formal hearings will be conducted before a tribunal selected from the membership of a
Hearing Panel for Sexual Harassment. The Hearing Panel will consist of 4 non-teaching
staff members appointed by the Syndicate/Executive Council/Board of Governor and 4
members of the teaching staff (gender balance), 2 students (one male/one female) with
outstanding merit and integrity appointed by the Syndicate/Executive Council/Board of
Governor. The Chair and the Vice-Chair shall be appointed by the Syndicate/Executive
Council/Board of Governor from among the members appointed by the
Syndicate/Executive Council/Board of Governor. Staff serving on the Hearing Panel will
be given released time to do so. The quorum requirement will be 50% of each category.
20.2 Members will be appointed to the Hearing Panel for staggered terms to provide for
continuity of experience. Student members shall serve one-year terms and teaching and
SSS eee | eee eee
Higher Education Commission Page 14
Policy Guidelines Against Sexual Harassment in Institutions of Higher Learning
non-teaching staff members shall serve two-year terms. Shorter terms may be required
occasionally to provide for staggering and to fill vacancies. No member shall serve for
more than two consecutive terms. Former members will be eligible for reappointment
after a lapse of two years. Members of the Hearing Panel will receive generic training by
the Harassment Monitoring Officer in the particular sensitivities which surround sexual
harassment issues, in procedures which effect fair resolutions and in penalties and
sanctions which are appropriate to the various breaches of policy and which act as
deterrents to further breaches of policy, together with the principles of Academic
Freedom. This training will not deal with specific cases currently before any tribunal
established under this policy and is in no way meant to fetter the independence of any
tribunal member to decide any case on the basis of the evidence presented in that case
and according to his or her conscience.
20.3. The Chair or, alternatively, the Vice-Chair, in addition to conducting the business of the
Hearing Panel, may chair the tribunals hearing formal complaints, or the Chair may
designate Chairs of tribunals from among the membership of the Hearing Panel.
21.0 SELECTION OF TRIBUNAL
AAS Upon receipt of the request for a formal hearing, the Secretary of the Syndicate/Executive
Council/Board of Governor shall forward to the Chair of the Hearing Panel the written
request for a formal hearing, together with the identity of the complainant and the
respondent.
21.2 A tribunal will consist of the Chair or Vice-Chair of the Hearing Panel (or designate), as
described above in clause 20.1, who will chair the tribunal, and two members of the
Hearing Panel, selected in accordance with the process described below in ciaiise 21.3.
Tribunal may co-opt a professional psychologist or gender specialist as needed or
considered appropriate.
21.3. Mindful of the constituencies represented by the parties in a case, the Chair of the
Hearing Panel will select six names of Hearing Panel members, including the Chair or
Vice-Chair if either or both has agreed to serve on the tribunal, to be presented to the
complainant and the respondent within 15 working days of receipt by the Secretary of the
Syndicate/Executive Council/Board of Governor of a request for a formal hearing. The
complainant and respondent may object in writing with reasons (i.e., bias, conflict of
interest, or other valid reason) to any of the names within 10 working days of receipt of
the names. After ruling on any objections presented by the complainant and/or
respondent, the Chair will select additional members from the Hearing Panel. If there are
any objections whatsoever to the Chair's presence on the Tribunal, the Chair will remove
herself or himself from the procedure.
21.4 The Chair will inform the Secretary of the Syndicate/Executive Council/Board of Governor
of the membership of the tribunal. The Secretary of the Syndicate/Executive
Council/Board of Governor shall then proceed to arrange for the formal hearing(s) in
accordance with the procedures set out below
22.0 PROCEDURAL RULES FOR FORMAL HEARINGS
22.1 Tribunals conducting Hearings under this policy shall follow the procedures set out in the
HEI Act or Statutes regarding discipline and conduct-HEI Faculty, staff/employees and
Students. The procedures detailed below govern in the absence of any judicial
determination to the contrary. Where any procedural matter is not dealt with below, the
Tribunal may, after hearing submissions from the parties, and guided by the principles of
fairness, establish any appropriate procedure.
22.2 Members of the tribunal must not hear evidence or receive representations regarding the
substance of the case other than through the procedures described in this document.
Ns
Higher Education Commission Page 15
Policy Guidelines Against Sexual Harassment in Institutions of Higher Learning
23.0 PARTIES TO THE HEARING
The signatory(s) to the written complaint (the complainant{s]) and the person(s) alleged in
the written complaint to have breached this policy (the respondent[s]) shall be parties to
the Hearing.
24.0 SCHEDULING
An attempt shall be made to schedule the Hearing(s) at a time and place convenient for the
tribunal and for the parties to the Hearing. However, any party whose reasons for absence are
not considered valid by the Chair of the tribunal or whose absence may cause unreasonable
delay, shall be notified that the tribunal will proceed in that party's absence.
25.0 NOTICE OF HEARING
25.1. The Hearing(s) shall be commenced as soon as possible following the appointment of the
tribunal. Each party to the Hearing shall be sent a Notice of Hearing stipulating the time
and place of the Hearing, and the parties to the Hearing, and identifying the subject
matter of the Hearing.
25.2 Prior to the Hearing, members of the tribunal shall be provided with: (a) the complainant's
request for a formal hearing, (b) the complainant's original written complaint, and (c) the
respondent's written response to the original complaint, if any.
26.0 RECORD OF HEARING
26.1 The Secretary of the Syndicate/Executive Council/Board of Governor will prepare a
Hearing Record consisting of documents which the parties wish to submit and on which
they intend to rely at the Hearing. Excluded from the record are any ‘without prejudice’
communications made with a view to informally resolving the complaint as well as the
report of the Harassment Monitoring Officer, or other HEI official, on the events which
transpired to resolve the complaint informally (see clause 16.0). Prior to making the
record available to members of the tribunal, the parties to the hearing are to have an
opportunity to review the content of the record and may bring on record a preliminary
motion to the tribunal seeking exclusion of part or all of the record which is to be made
available to tribunal members for the purpose of expediting the hearing. The documents
contained in the record are not admissible as evidence at the hearing except on consent
of all the parties to the hearing or upon being proven as evidence through witnesses at
the hearing.
26.2 Objective documentation, if required, of the proceeding of the tribunal should be
maintained by audio/video recording where high confidentiality of the records and other
such material shall be upheld at all times.
27.0 DUTIES OF THE TRIBUNAL CHAIR
27.1. The Chair's duties include, but are not limited to:
a. maintaining order during hearings;
b. answering procedural questions;
c. granting or denying adjournments;
d. arranging for a permanent audiotape-recording of the proceedings, which shall
constitute the official record of those proceedings; and
e. reporting decisions of the tribunal to the Head of Institution.
The above duties shall be undertaken in consultation with the tribunal members, if appropriate.
iS
Higher Education Commission Page 16
Policy Guidelines Against Sexual Harassment in Institutions of Higher Learning
28.0 COUNSEL
28.1
28.2
Both the complainant and the respondent have the right to be accompanied by an adviser
or to be represented by counsel.
All parties will bear their own costs related to the proceedings. The tribunal will not order
or recommend the payment of costs, including any legal costs, of the proceedings to any
party.
29.0 CLOSED HEARINGS
Hearings shall be held in camera unless either the complainant or the respondent objects that the
hearing, or some part of the hearing, should be held in public. In the event of such an objection,
the tribunal shall hear representations from all parties. In making its ruling, the tribunal shall
consider whether matters of an intimate financial or personal nature are to be raised, whether
there is an issue of public safety involved, the desirability of holding an open hearing and other
relevant circumstances.
30.0 ORDER OF PROCEEDINGS
30.1
30.2
30.3
30.4
30.5
30.6
30.7
The Chair's opening statement which shall identify the parties, introduce members of the
tribunal and other participants in the Hearing, identify the nature of the case, confirm that
all parties have had an opportunity to see the record and list any evidence which the
parties have agreed can be admitted on consent.
The complainant's opening statement, which shall contain a brief description of her/his
case, including what she/he believes is the offence.
The complainant's witnesses, each to be examined as follows:
- examination by the complainant,
- cross-examination by the respondent,
- questions from the Tribunal for the purpose of clarification and dealing with omissions,
- re-examination by the complainant, limited to points of clarification and to new issues
arising out of the cross-examination by the respondent and questions from the Tribunal,
which issues could not reasonably have been anticipated during the examination-in-chief.
The respondent's opening statement, which shall contain a brief reply to the
complainant's case, outlining the main points of her/his defense.
The respondent's witnesses, each to be examined as above (sub-section 30.3) beginning
with examination by the respondent, and so on.
Complainant's reply witnesses, limited to matters which could not reasonably have been
considered pertinent at the time that the complainant put in her/his case. The
complainant will not be allowed to split her/his case. Witnesses called in reply will be
examined as above, beginning with the examination by the complainant, etc.
Closing arguments to be made first by the respondent and then by the complainant.
Closing arguments should address both the substance of the complaint and the
appropriate penalty in the event that the complaint is found to be valid by the tribunal.
31.0 WITNESSES
The following rules govern witnesses.
31.1
31.2
31.3
Only parties to the hearing have the right to call witnesses at the hearing.
The tribunal has discretion to limit testimony and questioning of witnesses to those
matters it considers relevant to the disposition of the case.
Parties are responsible for producing their own witnesses and for paying the costs
associated with their appearance before the tribunal.
Higher Education Commission Page 17
31.4
Policy Guidelines Against Sexual Harassment in Institutions of Higher Learning
The Chair of the tribunal has the power to compel a witness to attend, and parties may
request the Chair's aid in this regard.
The Chair, on his or her own initiative may, or at the request of either party to the hearing
shall, issue an Order Excluding Witnesses from the hearing room except during the time
their testimony is required. Once such an order has been issued, witnesses are not to
confer amongst themselves or with other witnesses who have already testified.
32.0 EVIDENCE
The following evidentiary rules apply:
32.1
32.2
32.3
32.4
32.5
Parties to the hearing have the right to present evidence in support of their case to the
tribunal and to see any written or audio visual evidence presented to the tribunal.
The tribunal has the power to require production of written or documentary evidence by
the parties or by other sources.
A person appearing before the tribunal may be required to give evidence under
affirmation or oath.
The Harassment Monitoring Officer may testify as a witness, if called by one of the
parties, but shall not disclose information provided to her or him in confidence by the
parties or during ‘without prejudice’ negotiations, except on consent of the relevant party
or parties.
Complainant(s) may be questioned on behavior related to the incident(s) in question.
Apart from this, no complainant is to be questioned on previous behavior or character for
purposes other than those of establishing credibility as a witness
33.0 DELIBERATIONS BY THE TRIBUNAL
33.1
33.2
33.3
33.4
33.5
33.6
Following the formal hearing, the tribunal shall deliberate in closed session. The tribunal
will decide, either unanimously or by a majority of the members, the merits of the
complaint on the basis of evidence and arguments presented at the hearing. In order to
be upheld by the tribunal, complaints under this policy must be proven on the balance of
probabilities by clear and cogent evidence. Where the complaint is found to be valid, the
tribunal will recommend an appropriate penalty, either unanimously or by a majority.
In the event that the tribunal cannot reach a majority decision with respect to the
recommended penalty, the two members of the tribunal who do not occupy the position of
Chair shall each submit in writing to the Chair the penalty he or she believes is
appropriate. The Chair shall select one of these two proposals as the tribunal decision.
The tribunal shall prepare and submit to the Vice Chancellor/Rector/President/Director of
the HEI a written report which shall include the tribunal's decision and the reasons for the
decision, together with any recommendation for penalty. If there is a note of dissent
report, it shall also be submitted to the Vice Chancellor/Rector/President/Director.
Copies of the tribunal's report to the Vice Chancellor/Rector/President/Director shall be
sent in confidence to the complainant, the respondent and the Harassment Monitoring
Officer. Similarly, the Vice Chancellor/Rector/President/Director will inform all parties, in
writing, of the final decision in the case and course of action to be taken, if any.
The Vice Chancellor/Rector/President/Director shall ensure that any penalties
recommended are enforced by the authority responsible for implementing or imposing the
penalty. If the recommended penalty is suspension or dismissal, the Vice
Chancellor/Rector/President/Director shall initiate the appropriate procedure.
If the tribunal decides by a preponderance of reliable evidence that a complaint has been
fraudulent, malicious, frivolous or vexatious, or is entirely without factual basis, the
Tribunal hearing the original complaint will find that the complainant,’ as a result of the
complaint, is in breach of this policy & it will recommend to the Vice
ee ____
Higher Education Commission Page 18
Policy Guidelines Against Sexual Harassment in Institutions of Higher Learning
a a a SS a SS RES
Chancellor/Rector/President/Director such sanction or remedy against the complainant
as it feels is appropriate. Prior to finding that a complaint has been fraudulent, malicious,
frivolous or vexatious or is entirely without factual basis, the tribunal will advise the
parties that it is considering making such a ruling and specifically invite submissions on
this point.
33.7. Decisions of the tribunal are binding and cannot be appealed within the HEI.
33.8 The tribunal shall make any other recommendations or comments, as appropriate, to the
Vice Chancellor/Rector/President/Director, in a document separate from the report
containing the tribunal's decision and recommended penalty.
33.9 All records pertaining to tribunal procedures, decisions and recommendations shall be
retained by the Sexual Harassment Complaint Cell.
34.0 SANCTIONS AND REMEDIES
The following penalties, singly or in combination, may be imposed upon any respondent who is a
member of the teaching, research or non-teaching staff in any case where sexual harassment is
found to have occurred:
34.1. oral or written reprimand;
34.2 inclusion of the decision in a specified personnel file(s) of the respondent;
34.3 exclusion of the respondent from a designated portion(s) of the HEl's buildings or
grounds, or from one or more designated HEI activities, where such penalty is
appropriate to the offence and where the penalty does not prevent the respondent from
carrying out her/his professional duties;
34.4 — imposition of conditions, as decided by the Tribunal.
34.5 the imposition of a fine;
34.6 recommendation for suspension of the respondent without pay;
34.7 recommendation that dismissal proceedings be commenced; and/or
34.8 other, as deemed appropriate.
35.0 PENALTIES
The following penalties, singly or in combination, may be imposed upon a student respondent in
any case where sexual harassment is found to have occurred:
35.1. oral or written reprimand;
35.2 inclusion of the decision in a specified student file(s) of the respondent, for a specified
period of time, not longer than 7 years;
35.3 exclusion of the respondent from a designated portion(s) of the HEI's buildings or
grounds, or from one or more designated HEI activities, where such penalty is
appropriate to the offence and where the penalty does not prevent the respondent from
pursuing her/his studies;
35.4 — imposition of conditions, as decided by the Tribunal
35.5 prohibition of the respondent from attendance in a course(s), a programme, or a teaching
division or unit, for a period of not more than 1 year; and/or
35.6 — other, as deemed appropriate.
35.7 the tribunal of the Hearing Panel must recommend any appropriate sanction or remedies
it deems necessary to guarantee that the behavior is not repeated. The tribunal may also
make a recommendation to the Vice Chancellor/Rector/President/Director that the
complainant be accommodated for injury or damage to or loss of property, subject to
clause 26.
Higher Education Commission Page 19
Policy Guidelines Against Sexual Harassment in Institutions of Higher Learning
36.0
37.0
38.0
39.
35.8 | Suspension or dismissal may only be recommended, and such recommendations shall
be dealt with in accordance with the established policies and procedures and by the
terms or existing contracts of employment or collective agreements.
EDUCATION FOR PREVENTION
To ensure prevention of Sexual harassment on campus the HEI should develop programs to
educate and counsel its staff, faculty and students as well as provide written material for
reference. Education is essential to sensitizing the university faculty staff and students in order to
eliminate sexual harassment on campus. All Universities will develop an ongoing training
program. Completion and participation of the training program is to be made a requirement for all
those who enter employment or university services. Further, notices be placed by University
authorities regarding its policies. The Student Advisor in each faculty/department may
disseminate information about these programs, what constitutes sexual harassment, how to
respond to it and what to do when someone asks for advice about sexual harassment.
CONSENSUAL RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN HEI COMMUNITY
Under the policy it is highly inappropriate for any member of the community to establish an
intimate relationship with a student, subordinate or colleague on whose academic or work
performance he or she will be required to make professional judgments. The policy requires that
the individual should not involve themselves in such conduct as the professional responsibility for
supervision or oversight would be affected in case such an intimate relationship develops during
the working community.
APPEAL MECHANISM
Three member Appellate Body shall be formed by the Syndicate/Executive Council/Board of
Governor for hearing appeals on the decisions of the tribunal. The recommendations of the
appellate body will be submitted to the head of the HEI for further perusal of the same where the
Head of the HEI may decide to:
a. Send the recommendation of the Appellate Body to the Tribunal for reconsideration.
b. Uphold the decision of the Tribunal.
c. Any aggrieved by the decision of the head of the HEI based on the recommendation
of the Tribunal can appeal to the HEI Syndicate/Executive Council/Board of
Governors as its supreme appellate body/authority.
This policy may be reviewed from time to time, as required.
a ea A LEELA ES
Higher Education Commission Page 20
Printed at:
HEC: Printing Press