[TO BE INTRODUCED IN THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY]
A
Bill
to provide for establishment of a national commission for minorities
WHEREAS in accordance with Article 144 of the Constitution of the
Islamic Republic of Pakistan, the Provincial Assembly of Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa has passed resolution to the extent that the
Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) may by law constitute a _ national
commission for minorities;
WHEREAS it is expedient to provide for constitution of a national
commission for minorities to safeguard and promote social, economic,
political and legal rights and interests of non-Muslims, as provided for in
the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, and in accordance
with duly ratified applicable international instruments relating thereto;
AND WHEREAS it is necessary that in order to enable the national
commission for minorities to perform its functions effectively, it should
be provided with sufficient resources and adequate powers to ensure its
administrative and financial autonomy and to provide for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.
It is hereby enacted as follows:-
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, extent and commencement.-— (1) This Act
shall be called the National Commission for Minorities Act, 2023.
(2) It extends to whole of Pakistan.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. Definitions.- In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant
in the subject or context,-
(a) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the
Commission appointed under section 4;
(b) “Commission” means the National Commission for
Minorities constituted under section 3;
(c) “Fund” means National Commission for Minorities Fund
created under section 21;
(d) "Government" means the appropriate Government that
is to say Federal! or a Provincial Government, as the case
may be;
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)

(k)
(1)
(m)
(n)
(0)
(Pp)
(q)
“human rights” mean the fundamental rights as
guaranteed in Chapter 1 of Part II of the Constitution of
the Islamic Republic of Pakistan;
“member” means a person appointed as member of the
Commission by the Federal Government under this Act
and includes Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson; .
"minorities" shall have the same meaning as assigned to
the non-Muslim in paragraph (b) of clause (3) of Article
260 of the Constitution;
“minorities’ rights” or “rights of minorities” including
human rights in general, encompasses, subject to the
Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, special
safeguards and protections provided by the law,
including any affirmative measures and _ policy
interventions to minorities, exercisable individually and
collectively;
“prescribed” means prescribed by rules or regulations
made under this Act;
“President” means the President of the Islamic Republic
of Pakistan;
“Prime Minister” means the Prime Minister of the Islamic
Republic of Pakistan;
"public servant" means a public servant as defined under
section 21 of the Pakistan Penal Code (Act XLV of 1860);
“regulations” means the regulation made under this Act;
“rules” means rules made under this Act;
"secretary" means a person appointed as secretary
under section 8;
“staff” includes secretary, officer, adviser, consultant,
expert, intern and any other employee of the
Commission; and
“Vice-Chairperson” means vice-chairperson of the
Commission elected in accordance with the provisions of
this Act.
CHAPTER II
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR MINORITIES
3. Constitution of the Commission.— (1) The Federal
Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a
Commission to be known as the National Commission for Minorities , to
exercise its powers and perform its functions under this Act.
2)
(2)
(3)
(4)
namely:-
(5)
The Commission shall consist of twenty-nine members out of
which seventeen shall be non-official members from different faiths and
twelve shall be official members.
The following shail be non-official members of the
Commission, namely: -
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
four Christian members to be taken from its different
denominations;
four Hindu members out of which at least two must be
taken from the scheduled or marginalized casts e.g.
Kabootaray, Kohli, Megwar, Baghri, Bhail, Mali, Thukar,
Mehasheri, etc.;
three Sikh members;
one Parsi member;
one Kalash member;
one Baha’i member;
one Buddhist member; and
two Muslim members.
The following shall be official members of the Commission,
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(9)
(h)
(i)
a representative not below the rank of an officer in
BPS-20 or equivalent of the division to which business of
interior stands allocated; | ;
a representative not below the rank of an officer in
BPS-20 or equivalent of the division to which business of
human rights stands allocated;
a representative not below the rank of an officer in
BPS-20 or equivalent of the division to which business of
law and justice stands allocated;
a representative not below the rank of an officer in
BPS-20 or equivalent of the division to which business of
religious affairs and interfaith harmony stands allocated;
a representative not below the rank of an officer in
BPS-20 or equivalent of the division to which business of
Federal education stands allocated;
Provincial secretaries of the departments to which
business of human rights and minorities stands allocated;
a representative not below the rank of an officer in
BPS-20 or equivalent of the Council of Islamic Ideology;
Chairman, Evacuee Trust Property Board; and
Secretary of the Commission.
Preferably at least one-third of the members of the
Commission may be women.
Ms
(6) The Commission shall be a body corporate, having perpetual
succession and a common seal, with power to acquire and hold property
both movable and immovable, and to enter into contracts, and shall by
the said name sue and be sued.
(7) The headquarters of the Commission shall be located at
Islamabad. The Commission may set up sub-office or camp office at other
places with in Pakistan, as it may deem appropriate.
4. Appointment of Chairperson and members.- (1) No
person shall be appointed as non-official member of the Commission,
unless he -
(a) is a citizen of Pakistan;
(b) is a member of relevant faith mentioned in clauses (a) to
(h) of sub section (3) of section 3;
(c) is not less than thirty years of age;
(d) is a person of integrity, eminent ability and good repute,
in relation to his work;
(e) is in possession of not less than ten years of demonstrable
national or international working experience on human
rights or minorities rights;
(f) has not been dismissed, removed or given compulsory or
directory retirement from service of Pakistan
constitutional, statutory or corporate body on the grounds
of corruption or any other form of misconduct; and
(g) has not been adjudged as insolvent or his application for
this purpose is not pending adjudication;
(h) has not been by a competent court of law convicted for a
criminal offence involving moral turpitude; or
(i) has not been by a competent court of law declared as of
unsound mind or insane.
(2) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, no person
shall be appointed as Chairperson unless he fulfills the qualifications of
sub-section (1) with the modification that he shall be from amongst the
persons being minorities.
(3) The division to which business of this Act stands allocated
shall, as soon as possible, but not later than thirty days of the
commencement of this Act or a vacancy having occurred, invite
nominations through public notice from the public for appointment as a
member of the Commission.
(4) | Aselection panel comprising the following persons shall, after
interviewing eligible candidates, recommend to the Federal Government
a pane! of three suitable persons in order of merit, against each vacancy
of non-official members, namely:-
vi
1. /a retired judge of a High Court; __ Convener __|
@ representative not below the rank of Member
an officer in BPS-21 or equivalent of
the division to which business of |
_| human rights stands allocated; — ;
3. | a representative not below the rank of | Member
an officer in BPS-21 or equivalent of
the division to which business of
interior affairs stands allocated; | - a
4. | a representative not below the rank of. Member
/an officer in BPS-21 or equivalent of
the division to which business of law
and justice stands allocated; .
a representative not below the rank of | Member-cum-
an officer in BPS-21 or equivalent of, Secretary
the division to which business of this |
| Act stands allocated. : | |
(5) The Federal Government shall appoint, from amongst the
candidates recommended by the selection panel, a non-official member
against each vacancy and shall also appoint a Chairperson from amongst
the selected members, provided that the Chairperson shall be from
minorities.
(6) The Chairperson and members of the Commission shall be
entitled to such salaries, allowances, privileges and other terms and
conditions as may be prescribed in the rules.
(7) The Commission shall, within fifteen days of its first meeting,
elect from amongst its members a Vice-Chairperson who shall act in
place of the Chairperson if he is unable to attend his duties:
Provided that the Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson shall not be
from the same faith of the minorities community.
5. Term of office of Chairperson and members.-— (1) The
Chairperson and every member, other than official members, shal! hold
office for a term of three years extendable for a further term of three
years, provided that Chairperson or a member, other than official
members, shall not hold office for more than two terms.
(2) The Chairperson or a member may, at any time, resign from
his office in writing under his hand addressed to the Federal Government
through the division to which business of this Act stands allocated.
6. Vacancy in office of the Chairperson or a member.- If a
vacancy occurs in the office of the Chairperson or of any member,
whether by reason of death, resignation or removal, such vacancy shall
-_
a
be filled within a period of sixty days by making a fresh appointment in
accordance with the provisions of section 4 and the person so appointed
shall hold the office for the residual of the term of office of the
Chairperson or member of whom the vacancy has arisen.
7. Removal of the Chairperson or a member.- (1) The
Government may remove a Chairperson, Vice Chairperson or a member,
if he- '
(a) ceases to be a citizen of Pakistan;
(b) becomes insolvent;
(c) is guilty of misconduct or is convicted for an offence
involving moral turpitude;
(d) becomes of unsound mind or stands so declared by a
competent medical board;
(e) remains absent from four consecutive meetings of the
Commission without obtaining leave of absence in
writing; or
(f) has, in the opinion of the Government, misused the
position of the Chairperson, Vice Chairperson or member
to render his continuance in office detrimental to the
interests of minorities or the public interest.
(2) |The Chairperson or a member shail not be removed unless he
has been given opportunity of being heard in person by the selection
panel as referred to in sub-section (2) of section 4.
8. Officers and staff of the Commission.- (1) The Federal
Government shall in the prescribed manner appoint a secretary out of a
panel of three officers recommended by the selection pane! constituted
under section 4.
(2) |The secretary shall be an officer of the rank of BPS-20 or
equivalent MP scale, having relevant qualifications and experience. The
term of office of secretary shall be three years.
(3) The secretary shall be responsible for efficient implementation
of all decisions and orders of the Commission, as well as for effective
administration, management and supervision of the officers, employees
and assets of the Commission.
(4) |The Commission may, in the manner as may be prescribed by
regulations and subject to its budgetary resources, appoint including to
appoint by deputation such number of officers and employees including
advisers, consultants and experts as it considers necessary.
(5) The Commission shall determine the eligibility criteria,
salaries, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of its
ro)
officers and employees including advisers, consultants and experts in the
manner prescribed by regulations.
9. Facilitation to the Commission.-— A\| Federal and Provincial
Governments, local agencies and executive authorities shall subject to
such conditions, qualifications or restrictions as may be imposed by their
respective governing statutes or any other law for the time being in force
and subject to national and public interest, facilitate the Commission in
discharge of its duties and performance of its functions.
CHAPTER III
FUNCTIONS OF THE COMMISSION
10. Functions of the Commission.— The Commission shall
perform the following functions, namely:-
(a) assess and monitor implementation of the constitutional
guarantees and safeguard for promotion and protection
of rights of minorities ;
(b) examine and review existing or proposed policies or
programmes, plans of action, legislation, rules,
regulations, administrative instruments, or _ other
affirmative measures and recommend amendments,
give advice or propose suggestion for prevention of
discrimination and protection of rights of minorities ;
(c) develop a national action plan for promotion and
protection of rights of minorities;
(d) study the application of international minorities’ rights,
agreements and _ conventions, and_ provide’ the
Government with reports, proposals, or
recommendations necessary for effective application of
such rights, agreements and conventions;
(e) establish and maintain database on complaints received
concerning violation of rights of minorities or any such
violations otherwise coming to notice of the Commission;
(f) advise victims of the minorities’ rights on applicable legal
procedures and, where appropriate, assist them in
pursuing their complaints with the relevant authorities;
(g) ensure and monitor implementation of minorities’ job
quota in private and public sector organizations;
(h) ensure and monitor the protection, rehabilitation and
preservation of places of worship of minorities across
Pakistan;

(i)
(i)
(k)
(1)
on an application presented to it by a victim or any person
on his behalf or on a reference by Government or by the
Supreme Court of Pakistan, a High Court or by itself,
inquire into, or refer to a concerned agency for
investigation or inquiry into allegations of-
(A) any violation of rights of minorities or abetment or
aiding therecf by any organization, public or private,
or any body, department, authority or
instrumentality of any Federal, Provincial or local
government; or
(B) any neglect or willful breach of any provision of law
in the prevention of or fair and independent inquiry
or investigation of such a violation by any person or
authority; ‘3
subject to any relevant law, rules, regulations and policy,
participate in proceedings involving violation of rights of
minorities, before a civil society forum or police or a court,
by becoming a party to such proceedings;
subject to any relevant law, rules, regulations and policy,
a member. of the Commission or any person authorized
by it in this behalf may visit any police station, jail or any
other place of detention under the control of the
Government or its agencies, where convicts, under trial
prisoners or detainees being minorities are lodged or
detained to ascertain legality of such detention and
recommend appropriate remedial measures to the
concerned authorities, if so required;
sponsor, initiate, encourage and undertake studies,
research and other necessary interventions for analysis of
the issues faced by minorities, and make appropriate
recommendations to the Government for empowerment,
progress and development of these communities;
(m) subject to any relevant law, rules, regulations and policy,
(n

(0)
seek and receive information, data and documents
regarding minorities communities, from any source or
entity in the course of performance of its functions;
organize consultations, dialogues and seminars, with civil
society groups, actors and other similar institutions for
promoting awareness on issues of minorities, institutional
safeguard available for their protection and proposing a
way forward to the Government in these matters;
monitor implementation status of minorities right,
judgments and, where necessary, seek guidance and
support of higher judiciary to effectively deal with any
bottlenecks;
Xx
(p) subject to the relevant law, rules, regulations and policy,
recommend to the concerned authorities to remove any
discriminatory, hate material or other divisive content
appearing on social media, which is aimed at any
minorities in Pakistan and to take appropriate action
under the law against the publishers and creators of such
material;
(q) participate in local, regional and international forums
concerned with the protection and promotion of rights of
minorities;
(r) closely work with the Federal and provincial organizations
and agencies with the aim of ensuring discriminatory,
hate material or other divisive content is removed and
respect for minorities and _ interfaith harmony is
promoted;
(s) advise the Government and their relevant departments
on promotion of religious tourism of minorities in
Pakistan;
(t) submit special reports to both Houses of the
Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) through the Government on
any matter pertaining to minorities and in particular the
challenges encountered by them; and
(u) carry out such other functions related or incidental to the
above functions’ as the Commission may _ consider
necessary for promotion and protection of the rights of
minorities under this Act.
11. Advice of the Commission.- The Federal Government may
refer to the Commission for opinion any issue deemed appropriate
relating to the functions of the Commission.
12. Administrative and_ financial powers of the
Commission.— (1) The Commission shall enjoy complete administrative
and financial autonomy.
(2) The Commission shall have full powers to create, abolish,
re-designate, up-grade or downgrade any post, provided that the
expenditure is met with from within the allocated budget of the
Commission.
(3) The Commission shall have full powers to reappropriate, in
the manner as may be prescribed by regulations, funds from one head
of account to another head of account and to sanction expenditure on
any item from within the allocated budget.
(4) The Chairperson shall be the chief executive officer of the
Commission and also its principal accounting officer.
13. Procedure of meetings of the Commission.— (1) The
Commission shall regulate its own procedure in the manner prescribed
by reguletions.
(2) The Commission shall meet at least on quarterly basis or
whenever a need so arises.
(3) Notice for the meeting either at the direction of the
Chairperson or when so requested by one-third of the Commission's total
strength shall be issued, along with agenda, at least ten days before the
date of meeting.
(4) The quorum for meetings shall be one-half of the
Commission’s total existing strength, including any members joining
through modern techniques like video link conferencing.
(5) No decision of the Commission shall be valid unless taken by
a majority of the total members present and voting:
Provided that where an issue or matter pertains to a particular
minority, no decision of the Commission shall be valid unless the
members belonging to that minority community are part of the session
of the Commission in which such a decision is taken.
(6) In the event of a tie, the person chairing the meeting shall
have a casting vote.
(7) The Chairperson may invite to the Commission’s meeting any
persons whose opinion or experience he deems appropriate to seek
concerning a matter brought before the Commission for discussion,
decision or review. Any such person shall not be entitled to vote.
(8) All orders and decisions of the Commission shall be
authenticated by the secretary or any other officer of the Commission
duly authorized by the Chairperson in this behalf.
14. Vacancy not to invalidate proceedings of Commission.—
No act or proceedings of the Commission shall be invalid merely by
reason of existing of a vacancy in or defect in constitution of the
Commission.
15. Executive committee of the Commission.-— (1) The
Commission shall constitute an executive committee comprising the
Chairperson, two members and secretary of the Commission.
10
(2) The executive committee constituted under sub-section (1)
shall perform such functions as may be assigned by the Commission.
16. Appointment of sub-committees of the Commission.-—
(1) The Commission may constitute sub-committees comprising of its
members and may refer to them any matter for consideration.
(2) |The Commission may as it thinks fit constitute an expert or
advisery committee, possessing a special knowledge, which shall fix an
honorarium for services of the experts from the designated fund.
(3) The sub-committees constituted under sub-section (2) shall
be need based and time bound.
CHAPTER IV
POWERS OF THE COMMISSION
17. Inquiry into complaints.— (1) The Commission, while
inquiring into the complaints of violations of minorities’ rights, may call
for information or report from the Government or any other authority or
organization subordinate thereto, within such time as may be specified
by it:
Provided that if the information or report is not received within the
time stipulated for the purpose, the Commission may proceed to inquire
into the complaint on its own.
(2) Without prejudice to anything contained in sub-section (1), if
the Commission considers it necessary, having regard to nature of the
complaint, it may initiate an inquiry without calling for any information
or report.
(3) If at any stage of the inquiry, the Commission-
(a) considers it necessary to inquire into the conduct of any
person; or
(b) is of the opinion that the reputation of any person is likely
to be prejudicially affected by the inquiry,
it shall give to that person a reasonable opportunity of being heard and
to produce evidence in his defence:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply where the credit
of a witness is being impeached.
18. Powers of the Commission relating to inquiries.— (1) The
Commission shall, while inquiring into complaints under this Act, have all
the powers of a civil court trying a suit under the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908 (Act V of 1908), in respect of the following matters, namely: -

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
summoning and enforcing the attendance of witnesses
and examine them on oath:
requiring discovery and production of documents;
receiving evidence on affidavits;
requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any
court or office; and
issuing commission for examination of witnesses or
documents.
(2) |The Commission shall have power to require any person,
subject to any privilege which may be claimed by that person, to furnish
information on such points or matters as, in opinion of the Commission,
may be useful for or relevant to the subject matter of the inquiry.
(3) The Commission may take any of the following, amongst
other, steps upon the completion of an inquiry held under this Act,
namely :-
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
where the inquiry discloses violation of minorities’ rights
or negligence in prevention of violation of minorities’
rights by a public servant, it may recommend to the
concerned Government or authority the initiation of
proceedings for prosecution or such other action as the
Commission may deem fit against the concerned person
or persons;
recommend to the concerned Government or authority for
the grant of such immediate interim relief to the victim or
the members of his family as the Commission may
consider necessary;
provide a copy of the inquiry report to the accused and
complainant or his representative;
the Commission shall send a copy of its inquiry report
together with its recommendations to the concerned
Government or authority which shall, within a period of
one month or such further time as the Commission may
allow, submit its reply indicating the action taken or
proposed to be taken to implement the recommendations
or reasons why these cannot or should not be
implemented; or
the Commission shall publish its inquiry report together
with its recommendations and the reply of the
Government or authority thereto and place the same on
its website.
12
19. Statement made to the Commission.— Any statement
made by a person while giving evidence before the Commission shall not
Subject him to, or be used against him, in any civil or criminal
proceedings except prosecution for giving false evidence.
20. Protecting witness identity.-— Where the Commission
considers it necessary to protect the identity of a person who has made
a complaint or furnished or proposes to furnish information or produced
or proposes to produce a document or given or proposes to give evidence
or made or proposes to make a submission to the Commission or to a
person acting for or on behalf of the Commission, it may give directions
prohibiting the disclosure of the identity of such person:
Provided that if the Commission is satisfied that such person, his
family, friends or associates are at risk of any kind of serious harm in the
case of disclosure of his identity, it may give directions for their
protection:
Provided further that such directions may, where appropriate,
include directions for giving requisite physical protection, security of
employment, protection of privacy and securing human rights of such
person.
CHAPTER V
FUNDS, FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
21. National Commission for Minorities Fund.- (1) There
shall be created a fund to be known as the National Commission for
Minorities Fund which shall vest in the Commission and shall be used by
the Commission to meet charges in connection with its functions under
this Act.
(2) The following shall be the sources of the Fund, created under
sub-section (1), namely:-
(a) such annual grants as shall be allocated by the
Government;
(b) donations, contributions or grants made by the Provincial
Governments;
(c) donations, if any, made by private individuals, national
and international institutions and other Governments;
and
(d) income from investment made by the Commission.
(3) There shall be a separate account maintained in a scheduled
bank for meeting routine expenses of the Commission out of the Fund in
the manner as may be prescribed in the regulations.
\3
22. Expenditure to be charged on the Fund.-— The following
expenditures shall be charged to the Fund, namely: -
(a) expenditure lawfully incurred by the Commission, relating
to remuneration of its members, employees, advisers and
consultants, including legal fees, honorarium and other
costs;
(b) expenses, costs or expenditure incurred or accepted by
the Commission in performance of its functions or in
exercise of its powers under this Act;
(c) purchasing or hiring of accommodation, equipment,
machinery, repair and maintenance thereof and any other
work or undertaking in the course of performance of its
functions or in the exercise of its powers under this Act;
and
(d) repayment of any financial liabilities.
23. Accounts and audit.— (1) The Commission shall maintain
proper accounts and other relevant regords and prepare-an annual
statement of accounts in such a form as may be prescribed in accordance
with the provisions of Articles 169 and 170 of the Constitution.
(2) The accounts of the Commission shall be audited by the
Auditor-General at such intervals as may be specified by him.
(3) |The Auditor-General and any person appointed by him in
connection with the audit of the accounts of the Commission under this
Act shall have the same rights and privileges and the authority in
connection with the audit of Government’s accounts and in particular
shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts,
connected vouchers, other related documents and papers, and to inspect
any of the offices of the Commission.
(4) |The accounts of the Commission, as certified by the Audit-
General or any other person appointed by him in this behalf, together
with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually to the Federal
Government by the Commission, and the Federal Government shall
cause the audit report to be laid, as soon as may be after it is received,
before both Houses of the Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament).
CHAPTER VI
MISCELLANEOUS
24. Annual and other reports.— (1) The Commission shall, by
end of September each year, prepare an annual report giving a true and
1
full account of the Commission’s activities during the previous financial
year along with any recommendations.
(2) The Chairperson shall present the annual report to the
President. The Commission shall simultaneously forward copies of the
report to the Government.
(3) |The Commission may at any time prepare special reports on
any matters which in its opinion are of particular urgency or importance.
(4) The Federal Government shall, within three months of receipt
of annual report and within one month of receipt of any special report,
cause these reports to be laid before both Houses of the Majlis-e-Shoora
(Parliament) along with a memorandum indicating the action taken or
proposed to be taken on the recommendations of the Commission and
reasons for non-implementation of the recommendations, if any.
(5) In case of non-acceptance of any recommendations, the
Federal Government shall inform the Commission of its reasons thereof.
(6) The Commission shall, after presentation to the President
under sub-section (2), place the annual report and special reports on its
official website for information of general public.
25. Chairperson, members and employees of _ the
Commission to be public servants.— The Chairperson, members and
employees of the Commission shal! be deemed to be public servants
within the meaning of section 21 of the Pakistan Penal Code (Act XLV of
1860).
26. Returns or information.— The Commission shall furnish to
the Federal Government such returns or other information with respect
to its activities as the Federal Government may, from time to time,
require.
27. Delegation of powers.- The Commission may, by
notification in the official Gazette, delegate such of its powers as deemed
necessary to a standing committee or a member.
28. Indemnity.— No civil, criminal or any other proceedings shall
lie against the Commission, Chairperson, Vice-chairperson, member or
employee or any other person of the Commission for anything which is
done, or intended to have been done, in good faith, in pursuance of this
Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder or by or under the
authority of the Commission. ;
29. Power to make rules.-— (1) The Commission may, with the
approval of the Federal Government, make rules for carrying out the
purposes of this Act in respect of its external matters.
1S
30. Power to make regulations.— (1) The Commission may, by
notification in the official Gazette, make regulations for the conduct of its
internal business, including efficiently and effectively organizing and
managing its resources and its administrative, operational and other
functions under this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to generality of the
foregoing powers, the regulations may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:-
(a) salary, allowances, status, privileges and other terms and
conditions of service of the members appointed under
section 4;
(b) terms and conditions of the administrative and technical
staff and the salaries and allowances of officers and other
staff appointed under section 8;
(c) the form in which the annual statement of accounts is to
be prepared under section 24; and
(d) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed
by regulations under this Act.
31. Act to have overriding effect.-— The provisions of this Act
shall have effect notwithstanding anything contrary contained in any
other law for the time being in force.
32. Power to remove difficulties.— Ifa difficulty arises in giving
effect to any provision of this Act, the Federal Government may by order
in writing published in the official Gazette, make such provision as may
appear to it to be necessary for removing the difficulty.
(1) Whereas al! citizens are equal before law and entitled to equal protection of law according to
the Constitution of Pakistan, 1973.
(2) Whereas the state is bound to promote respect of Religious Diversity and create favorable
conditions in which followers of Minority Religions are enabled to freely practice, express and
develop their own culture as it is guaranteed in the Constitution of Pakistan, 1973.
(3) Whereas the Islamic Republic of Pakistan is a state party to various International Instruments
on Human Rights, including the Declaration on the Rights of Persons belonging to National or
Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic Minorities of the United Nations which require measures for
the protection of the Religious Minorities and their promotion.
(4) Whereas the state is committed to protect, empower and develop underrepresented
Communities, including Religious Minorities, to ensure their effective participation in
economic, political and public life.
(5) Whereas, the Supreme Court of Pakistan, in a judgment dated 19.06.2014 in Suo Moto Case
No. | of 2014, on the protection of Minorities, has directed that Federal Government should
constitute a statutory body for monitoring and making appropriate recommendation for
realization of the constitutional and legal safeguards guaranteed to the religious minorities
under the constitution and the law; and
(6) Whereas, in pursuance of Article of 144 of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan,
the provincial Assembly of Khyber Pakhtunkhawa in its sitting held on 06.08.2021has
unanimously passed Resolution No. 1186 which resolves that Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament),
may by Law establish National Commission for Minorities;
(7) Now therefore, the instant Bill, titled the “National Commission for Minorities Act, 2022”, is
placed before this House for consideration and approval.
2S
Po 4
Mufti Abdul Shakoor
Federal Minister
PLE IGS
PleiZ eBL PETC es
Jkt
LSI AS FF Ze teh Sum iLL I yu SW
ce AF HUA Lee bee Seu}
LAWL AIT? Cibo sie Skule Ue ey LR
Mle LUA tL par SS ce EL WL PIAL BF
iste FS SSIS Ply Sie LLL
& PE LN eS BLS be bi PH CIL Ae nA, Se
Erbe OU ICES Ee, AW oli IPE ree
Lb LiFe yule bolt
ete Oso ItLask
fot
fin
err high Gl eh, Ob
Kner th
bho rth (r)
bn Kiaueid,
rt bel OGL ere bBo teliyl ey Fo Ss
8
te OPES A eFE tab “gfe (AN
Ce AUPE SIL UH aM ue Mabe 18” (Z)
ne Se OO Ob ee spe Rie ee” ()
WALL I ar WMS PLY OF ee GP OU" ()
oO aettenwL
Pie Alek dictickinre yey” O
ce Set Rtn oA
(DI Lryrris re iL oS lee Buea (Sia a ele 6)
te RU su
RATER? WU PEA LU PL UP Ve BiGe” (Y)
SF b OI Ib LiL YN port Sel th bine
rebut WAAL OAL Ue aA yiin
Uni fez ef Boi Ale
apo thru Creslch ile se” ()
fe NMI wt Site “ue” (Sf)
eee HI et irle Py” CS)
eWoel Nu ey zat tee rte he Gyr” ()
to SL Ltr tad S CIA
Up pblr/CrcFL hii ye” (¢)
pl pul dos Cresl tb Sle wie” Cy)
eli hn BeGL mabe WE” (yy)
Se pi bs Sol bescphe 6 Cle ne E KPH” (f)
A
Ne
uv: pa PEL Fem febilelit fe? (3)
Hoel
PHS I6 Ushi
lhe Se FL Lin Rupr tL PHIL Un Le
bese ZL
sl meine BL ih re tr putitiy! ©
LUM ONL
OL un siiS6eAL Pt? (0)
Levee si RC etd CM
(be bye VISE rE Fife terutinene ()
abe SPS bebe KasA si bles AL
Wilkie &)
‘SiS ©)
but G)
wiiyoxatl C)
JOE (UY)
Pani?
UNS L ih sts 7Fee op AL re ely tee Li (BN)
ary
nll (Obra yy si
VIGIL ibe Ferre AIL rr wigg axes ()
ner e 66O® Sui yy fos}
VIGIL ibs fe mpl AL rr wiggrwvti (%)
nl ere CHM y ss
Vie Luthxcfe wl Lr igure )
sl ere 66 F eal tl igi yf}
VIGIL ibs fe ml AL riggers ©)
ell erp 66 bby 3
on F bre k Koei Gr uimbew Ab ecuMsi G)
UT wawe-Loutnc we Ar igeawtt ()
ee
Nh SG mene (YU)
Sikbe Ys)
SoS HF IH 2 boyz ete Hb ee eu ere oO
a Cn iy Sle pte shee Cx fe teste br CE RE ILS
-e L eyy!
Stitt a adic i te tnpisause (2)
ASU sir eS ee LE
PUPL SK AHP ES OO ual 0
ae tbs
mo SCI Cw)
op
nol beth Br SS OBIS Mair bi Steds CH)
neler (%)
sno PWV shedUWelnet hho be G)
Soe CSM Sie xe GPL UM IGF OU GO)
note bef
Wa ES Ue UU IRE Lutte ©)
SALI esi phertiphemh Kr Af
wl AsAks
MWA L seltue Liens yin siAipet G)
o -
Ef
wine SES SIU pz Spd tb Sys ucil (YU)
sivilys
nites Ave Pie bluster Cb)
bi LBL oe Ferp MOP tal ay lefins W
Ree LWIGIg SPL KPa t Holy god FS AOS
Ute
Us ute wT of ifotes “lee 62 boo bLiiauyies (Fr)
KPIS CE ppb ihe iL lo Wie piven STi
EL eltie/s
heh ere ib Ste STL Sneed)
Ke SPP evr tel bse te Lb ish BL Ae FI alee
be S
<p
as PIS Se-L igre CL zh roe Vt
Un LP iviL ete L hai nel
ae fh PIS Se E sired boy Kir
nd LiL Mab iiance
Unf Pr wiL hi plans
LEGU Sb ee Ut Uurlert fie ie SGP bis (0)
Sewbph Se LPI S Ra tie F iS LS Sb b SNe
bre LU
Adiste aan FL lle Ale VHF Lisle, ae (1)
-Uri > pl Sessile
6 RU he Kote ssiL png L id zteh! (2)
6 Spb KELL Abby is Aig oS Rh SE
Ma ELL Solu SUB BU ushers BS e eb PF
Lux
« pale L BL, Wb (1) wvabee Ge afl Usleyy <4 ~o
Pbntige sp Loe Urbs re L soe G6 UE Sales
bn be PL tM UnbogseS bile ere MNS lene bf
44>
Pre hi ntreily pie Klar
SP Pa nL Sy Aor
cers CIS WA wit Sbonuf bol bere ait
LILA pea SIL gi Worside te ndice af bAdiP
Seb SSM RU DPA NMOL LY Gull ea SUase sn
nthe te Looerth bbe ula
SASS Re eer& WW bab the fe Lo
Ae SES
x GPCI CSN)
inthis CY)
Le Lind scab t FF Gurl ted ste Sows (%)
telly
Vie Aree Styler P76 G)
BE Poet Sod nifeurieuy Le ©)
iste S
A nl KL She BU ey tense ©)
IAL been eC UM pipe afl
SPL db Sree rrihsweze
ne cbr 6 bite bie but
Pin cirncki, 0 Mal LP A
Se SE uy Be She RE Wi ibrhGilre e
HEDGES Libr AiGGe Sober ulodisesik (1)
SS otireg So uf LSE Bn B6
PEI Ketel 2 Selbluleb le VL MLE (r)
bie ibebsil fib Fara
WE Ardyec tule Re Seren rciot (0)
bE JD eget LP fsa pus iwe amps Sy et Mhsle AI
i i Use abslel Sle tty PrusprensiSirift (0)
SP Bi 8L cist set Fole Rwy pl
KIS or LEBEL Seb L Uyeda cid
wer ei Ae PE BW L obobestIstund Hse iby IA Kr”
(rt
WLLL Tule oe TAL eblowit PL GPL CN
SFist Ze6
cblrcwl de Siw sve i ieate urihy bust Loitsslore CL)
Lui be Att Ob Sees hy eciyreo Ge
beret Ae SAI £ RG SL iI LFL IP
HEF
thee 2 KOIAL seit JCGPL UP)
MNF Nb CWI IAPL FY oIUr tA GPL VAC GC)

Pu SPL WIE FP aIUr tl IRL ek
Hist ie-lys?
SIFU per Pe Ur Sb IRL Us
CIRM Phe AEA Je PoE Uys
Mer, KEL BAC OWI NOY AOL IPL UH
Slt Sg Sel CUPL L 28 Bren ble
thea
SW Sst SIwL sf Fil VF tu LA ico
Site Sebi Se LL Unberle SU tse
tt
pein SCE eS re SAU
ye eT ede Pestle vb See
Aisa £ SAF PPC AAS ee SAE!
tL we
Sen FW Ee OS Se SSG dL dr (HN
SSE SSPE Ue bb Kot
Uinta SuibactAetbll tS
SEY RGS Sirs Cle ee SOUP OK (Y)
betel bis l yet PL UAF wuts
tt SSA SoU
Lute AG Ur OE ot Lables uid ges
AL Pe Si SOS IPL Util Nes”
tml Sd ALL bol

Cs)
(3)

(4)

Us
ab Sieidn CP OL A Luly ty Ieae hi (1)
SMe Be ity Sr PEM Lin tele
HeighApd ree eh Gy Let UyPpL se
NUnL Ei By nL ey Ape nonce Ase
Ite SWE Sour Ebb bed Wi fev
BES fie Soar Fiei- esG ae
SS bp hostels Le fl iets
LT Lb Ay ale Gioktd sult Sphere Tole
hoetee va Le sbisleey
Pe Ugly GH. Gee st ash bile wel 9 OTe eatte
is hard Ls eI SFE WN elystss Es eb se
Arsh Ne att es:
Esso poh Serre Lz sb sob Bie Luri
L abst is SeCaheleA Cones Le Usb SU
thet Len lta Got A dest Went
Soin lgeusl KUAG ky Uline BSL rH
tS berber Sse Ma L Hy biye ss ye
ASI RIS ES UI 3b by“ Lisl birt IGS
I exe) rte iedrair 3 Es voir efi
Lib St CL steht be SPE SLy te di bs
Be SVM HoFL y IGS
LISI as GC Wee Se Fe bo AFL ORL Hi
(J)

(wy)
(uy)
(0)
(5)
aI)
Aish vw Ae ABs uti bende (YW)
be SALLE LI litle PASE Gir
Livle-LuisuPiturlUrseluvie” (HD
Pe
wie Se Pe Ui tusIiuwEe (we beue ©)
ibe Sb Se Leh fe NL ER Raf!
Le shi Lb ikelhGLy me PZ WD
bp Lb spi bBL GPL VPI Ai
CW PL Lee $f
dvi gun dae (1) ee URIGU LI SUL of
mets b Leer
LA ees bb he ALS EM SII
Lf pL le eh RPA bel gp hL un Moi aI YL
L ble Se BiG ALI ea pre eu LP (Fr).
hei Sable tht RE 2A WE SLL berlres
ba FA sbi kb ul WS aioe
eri iL ble iby peel () kp PK rel oft Ih
be Sg AR Prot
be Sethe he S algun Gif ee (r)
SASL EWIIL PH oS BItbwi Lue ()
be nn fife br Sil een i Seto Ae
gry
Gr
LL 442 ALE By tierra SSE Lurie! (0)
nih yuidbenfbes
pint ee ES NE Bat bn en hey Li MUiiY (0)
Umeda} Tat! Kin = bi Abel ee Sle Se Sau ae
a bli terns h WIL PHL cE PE GAGS Bit be
bn Feb Phe Semen $ tei tewSian
Bd ht. Are S Pe Cs Pens tui ft: “ypfe (£)
be Ne ref EAL rnd LEvL Es LS?
LM REA SBE PASE EIS sete OieVLigt (A)
Seb Seth Snitz tla del
wiKik abenttnSiyrhod A SPBLBE 0
Son ttileterL PL PAL mar SUC MUI UE lal
wopRxbes PEE Gee 0 PHS SY 10
np HEL Pt
SPA ce Ceo Ah PE KLIP ALIS ILM AGS
Ui bk tab
SA petiLuid! Pied bs See 2 "
KEN UIL Lube SOLE,»
2 1 SE SoS ARF dob OE Sel! (r)
ELPA Len tr SPALL chabet pA
Suni Su Spe AA SoZ Nbds (7)
dry
(Mp4
Wal fh
WL Wy mB SOPL ut! ae AF Ses wlZ
Lontld Lahey mettle Way been Ae es
a A bert re Se SU eeu
Pb iL ct PL EP Neer ey enw AF
EGET AF peckec|
LS hed SecePMNHL he PAE ASU LOE ©
BELTS PAE Deore FG hinzAzen
Pep KeLcnsih (r)
be hart hogy tte ALIVE LE (AN)
MIL Fey Peo S PFS Un z My (Y)
ARC r PIL S Bek to wz errr gi
-s
ste Gal So SU USA tod se eb AF
Lefiviad! W MAIL Pe ys a
LO PeliplQed Wy sblesrt on Sri tire lie SAF Sole?
= PL Un oN BCL Hr Sr ty FL 190A
tebe Vulgate alt Be SA6 Syl A_ bys (a)
Sb ulerlodietytes (2)
tH rrcileturtuie (%)
asi ZI) PG iS6 bie hole (5)
aI"
ize Lob Serpe” (s)
le Cyye iL Ppa 2Orl on fre POY
bn" Lie Abin Lo a IF soohite USP Lee
Ube vse ea en SES GA LGPL Si ip (r)
2 Fre Pe Wa bie
a SAS CI CS bb 3 SOP L UF S718 Ule CN)
Tt SEN Gi tBu S bin SB SOPL
SASS VIET Ee la 6) Lage ba ee eee
Sr Bel SOU arf ee ES
SAP Gomes HL wel vil Wiles (WH)
CES Sib SEL erst Si SIGIS we
BE SARL Seay SA ae pear? (%)
berPaer late Lyi Puivewcmisidg! ©)
fh Le tnt la ph Zobel blink Aid ei
Lipo Sn uA by LON ese ie
Mow Selma Fb $ SNe SSS
OL EUUM EELS
Ave! Le iIL ete SiCey WAFS! O)
he sbi lreash lbe Aor Se
Lert Prine perd ff ete ~!9
CI 6 Mh Sue Md rel Sib GIG ret tE Iriel
oO fe il
1Op
eben Sn Peh hese KP behest hou” Lt
nett Gul ytd Byeds noch fin dai
LE PL bd Shea LL Yih te SoM LS We WLS
Ce LLL hil ost lr Lesinri i Ae Sit
SINS beers lee 6 Patt Sot te SPN Seg b pF
ee LBL yes In tn Pb syFL ES te SL Gest!
hiss BF be bet et Note Ulett CAN eg b FAP
bn HELE CS? OUI Po Lb sal Slat bs
Bove
LST la Wher 23
2 uh CELL; AL (1) Ebi Ps ~F
ee te Ue eIL Lt lst bn HAL PLR bob Verve pth GH
ELL LE Syste tseL Pee
HEL wE ged Od nl yas Beh ia” (r)
AC Pee ALA ees)
lbecze ler tbe ASP CH)
SUPP bal sll Gilets Gee Grund iectee (%)
whine se
bute With 3 (Payee (s)
UG bE LEM ge LBL Jel ff (1)
EL tbl ce hE LL
4"
fhe Bebe eb Lb be 2 rr
F
hike UL eee AL Libba ese! (a)
LNA PGI A MU Pe Ure aly
cotter iAizss
Lehi we isriztd reppeieti (~)
Une e tO RIL ela heF
sida drake Std ei ASG blikeH, (%)
Nl SL ee bel Si SALLE!
phi greseeha ae
hii Soywe sigs G)
Mit hevtihu se hostee ry W ~eSTaolelle> tr
ent TL of Wee BL yp tee Oi tI Keo BE
nt ES Ser POWLelGI£
SNS ee CE UE STL cule be SI 2 As Kel b Lit (r)
2p Gerifo ed
Leste PPE rt Je Sui aAsTeFLekion (r)
Unb tS Le sLel be TRL un Wo tle GPO tesr”
PIL LW (Be Seiirelzsts 3 hiigin Peto SII pA
bn PCL SL 6 7b SOL
PES le Ae SMI AAS Reel pe vehi!
So Bis peel L Luge 3s lA le SAS, ‘a Sot
(od) Sit neue wt L Lt rey esiek Mr steL fea Ls
ESI
a
Lette KEL Pept! 1 vib Assloul
be Spent dne eo renbucInsPtuln£ etre
Me PBS ec CPE A eeycloye (1)
$21
SIRES ROLL pes 9h Se air (r)
Unb etthes#
Lb Se GFE FL GA Sen scteash bis (0)
1h WES ESP RAL ph eth Myths ob
62 Sg Selb Siec| are L Sere fetteusin Fool 6 Ubesé
SEA BEI L (ee EPS
SEL ee eS Pe Dieter fede Seti- (0)
phew LES Bete fuel Nb biek
Spt Lobel yer
Ur (eiih G6) 24s Ae t tbaslett lee RL Y fi
CIM ee O ALE NI ely Pash lt shalt Uleorg (i
Eb oF aboS
~fO
Ss
KSA Un b0 Le bieret ey
AeA L gid Ces Oh: it ULI ~tZ
ES LAIN EAL (Sia -rsRoel Fl
Lew Myr Gekloelis) oaele tA
PLEA SOL as. LP ebb nrg a or BL fhe?
SS B36 Sr FU Cedi bi GLE nb rte yin ve EL
Jat
pe he CP Se bis () wleCLS Cueld _*4
bE SILL ELE PA sek iri te Las!
Renrwbrsichiys APL SC bly? 1
Ebi plg tte bE Spy £ gop A Gri Poet iL
tt Zhi Fete SL put Pie sikh
bbe PS ble Lt PERL eh Sebo sh GA, (Fr)
HPL PLOY Lt Be PO
Seribsbobelped p< As wel Sot UX H2FL (7) sis (BN)
yl ii,
SE Lath iorHi DeFL Mabrsslods ASS Poi Se! Cw)
AGU sholF
UE bo pelbrrieysieFL tha tyrutay An (&)
Blo Serie iL wireFL Siri Se r Kb G)
ngfix
€'9p
eibilhiys lyre leligt or
LuntnanZ Ag tity itasre piSort BiTOTITE
FIT AL FLL NL Le tN PY
af Min JEL BP iL AS PE eZ Sek Binet fy
Sse J
a
Tae, Viole
Lg AYL ery rower elLlyItperse (1)
TABLE LF Ge
SES goth biiwi bsp riled ble tic WR (1)
aK ES GS Astle Ke edd Poli OeL eli tit Ure se
2 Grete S Ite ner Lee
Es Pe VA Wea a PUSIL eH gut SW (FP)
FL Lbebzseo Sot Pe OF bleh Pe GPL YALL
ee Seb IIL AWwILe wl yureud £7253
phe bee Sole bir Cob Cel fee UPigine-the (0)
Eee PSs tava p-HylLarSui
a LVL tL yAL 19-06-2014 srLutlewec& (0)
WN WO FL Yiu Fre be ALLL 20144 AYES
Bid Li Seti ri GW hE Ly ob Geren ip Seur bye
pie PS Ge ib 96
LIA Kido tive Sun eiligf iL SH pnt Sig (1)
Se YAP LEU Ais ALi PBA ells asf 06-08-2021 3.27
2S PILL ALL Go sibed btut
MN fe ererre sli GB ZL PAF iP 6 kar lil (2)
AL ES Pl yPfZ lL
Hue
~/I9( 56s