REGISTERED No. ¥L- 302
L.-7646
EXTRAORDINARY
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY
ISLAMABAD, MONDAY, AUGUST 22, 2016
PART I
Acts, Ordinances, President’s Orders aud Regulations
NATIONAL ASSEMBLY SECRETARIAT
Islamabad, the 19th August, 2016
No. F. 22(3)/2015-Legis——The following Acts of Majlis-e-Shoora
(Parliament) received the assent of the President on the 18th August, 2016 are
hereby published for general informatton:—
ACTNO. XL OF 2016
An Act to make provisions for prevention of electronic crimes
WHEREAS it is expedient to prevent unauthorized acts with respect to
information systems and provide for related offences as well as mechanisms for
their investigation, prosecution, trial and international cooperation with respect
thereof and for matters connected therewith or ancillary thereto;
It is hereby enacted as follows:—
(745)
Price: Rs. 20.50
[3545(2016\VEx. Gaz.]
746 THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., AUGUST 22, 2016 {PART I
CHAPTER 1
PRELIMINARY
: 1. Short title, extent, application and commencement——{1) This
Act may be called the Prevention of Electronic Crimes Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of Pakistan.
(3) It shall apply to every citizen of Pakistan wherever he may be and
also to every other person for the time being in Pakistan.
(4) It shall also apply to any act committed outside Pakistan by any
person if the act constitutes an offence under this Act and affects a person,
property, information system or data Jocated in Pakistan.
(5) It shall ccme into force at once.
2. Definitio 1s —(1) In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in
the subject or context,——
(i) “fact” includes—
(a) ase‘ies of acts or omissions contrary to the provisions of this
Act; or
(b) causing an act to be done by a person either directly or
through an automated information system or automated
mechanism or self-executing, adaptive or autonomous device
and whether having temporary or permanent impact;
(ii) “access ta data” means gaining control or ability to use, copy,
_ modify or delete any data held in or generated by any device or
~ information system;
{iii} “access to information system” means gaining control or ability to
use any part or whole of an information system whether or not
through infringing any security measure;
(iv) “Authority” means the Pakistan Telecommunication Authority
established under the Pakistan Telecommunication (Re-organization)
Act, 1996 (XVI of 1996);
{v) “authorization” means authorization by law or by the person
empowered to make such authorization under the law: :
PARTI ]
(vi)
(vii)
{vili)
(ix)
(x)
(xi)
(xii)
THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., AUGUST 22, 2016 747
Provided that where an information system or data is available
for open access by the general public, access to or transmission of
such information system or data shall be deemed to be authorized
for the purposes of this Act;
“authorized officer” means an officer of the investigation agency
authorized to perform any function on behalf of the investigation
agency by or under this Act;
“Code” means the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act V of
1898);
“content data” means any representation of fact, information or
concept for processing in an information system including source
_code or a program suitable to cause an information | system to
perform a function;
“Court” means the Court of competent jurisdiction designated
under this Act;
“critical infrastructure” means critical elements of infrastructure
namely assets, facilities, systems, networks or processes the loss or
compromise of which could result in.—
(a) major detrimental impact on the availability, integrity or
delivery of essential services including those services, whose
integrity, if compromised, could result in significant foss of
life or casualties, taking into account significant economic or
social impacts; or
(b) significant impact on national security, national defense, or
the functioning of the state:
Provided that the Government may designate any private
or Government infrastructure in accordance with the
objectives of sub-paragraphs (i). and (ii) above, as critical
infrastructure as may be prescribed under this Act;
“critical infrastructure information system or data” means an
information system, program or data that supports or performs a
function with respect to a critical infrastructure;
“damage to an information system” means any unauthorized change
in the ordinary working of an information system that impairs its
performance, access, output or change in location whether
temporary or permanent and with or without causing any change in
the system;
748 THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., AUGUST 22. 2016 [PART I
(xiii)
(xiv)
(xv)
(xvi)
(xvii)
(xviii)
(xix)
(xx)
(xxi)
“data” includes content data and traffic data;
“data damage” means alteration, deletion, deterioration. crasure,
relocation, suppression of data or making data temporarily or
permanently unavailable;
“device” includes,—
(a) phwsical device or article;
(b) any electronic or virtual tool that is not in physical form;
(c) a password, access code or similar data, in electronic or other
form, by which the whole or any part of an information
system is capabie of being accessed; or
(d) automated, self-executing, adaptive or autonomous devices,
prc grams or information systems;
“dishonest intention” means intention to cause injury, wrongful
gain or ‘wrongful loss or harm to any person or to create hatred or
incitement to violence;
“electronic” includes electrical, digital, magnetic, optical,
biometric, electrochemical, electromechanical, wireless or
electron agnetic technology;
“identity information” means an information which may
authenti:ate or identify an individual or an information system and
enable access to any data or information system;
“information” includes text, message, data, voice, sound, database,
video, signals, software, computer programmes, any forms of
intelligence as defined under the Pakistan Telecommunication
(Reorganization) Act, 1996 (XVII of 1996) and codes including
object code and source code;
“information system” means an electronic system for creating,
generating, sending, recciving, storing, reproducing, displaying,
recording or processing any information;
“mtegriiy” means, in relation to an electronic document,
electronic signature or advanced electronic signature, the
electronic document, electronic signature or advanced electronic
Signature that has not been tampered with, altered or modified
since a articular point in time:
PART | |
(xxii)
(xxiti)
(Xxiv}
(xxv)
{xxvi)
(xxvii)
(xxviii)
{XXiX)
(xxxi}
THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., AUGUST 22, 2016 749
“interference with information system or data” means and includes
an unauthorized act in relation to an information system or data that
may disturb its normal working or form with or without causing
any actual damage to such system or data;
“investigation agency” means the law enforcement agency
established by or designated under this Act,
“minor” means, notwithstanding anything contained in any other
law, any person who has not completed the age of eighteen years;
“offence” means an offence punishable under this Act except when
committed by a person under ten years of age or by a person above
ten years of age and under fourteen years of age, who has not
attained sufficient maturity of understanding to judge the nature and
consequences of his conduct on that occasion;
“rules” means rules made under this Act;
“seize” with respect to an information system or data includes
taking possession of such system or data or making and retaining a
copy of the data; 7
“service provider” includes a person who,—
(a) acts as a service provider in relation to sending, receiving,
storing, processing or distribution of any electronic
communication or the provision of other services in relation to
electronic communication through an information system;
(b) owns, possesses, operates, manages or controls a public
switched network or provides telecommunication services; or
(c) processes or stores data on behalf of such electronic
communication service or users of such service;
“subscriber information” means any information held in any form
by a service provider relating to a subscriber other than traffic data;
“traffic data” includes data relating to a communication indicating
its origin, destination, route, time, size, duration or type of service;
“unauthorized access” means access to an information system or
data which is not available for access by general public, without
authorization or in violation of the terms and conditions of the
authorization;
750 THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN. EXTRA., AUGUST 22, 2016 [PART 1
(xxxii} “unauth rized interception” shall mean in relation to an information
system or data, any interception without authorization; and
(xxxiii}) “unsolicited information” means the information which is sent for
commercial and marketing purposes against explicit rejection of the
recipient and does not include marketing authorized under the law.
(2) Unless the context provides otherwise, any other expression used in
this Act or rules made: thereunder but not defined in this Act, shall have the same
meanings assigned to the expressions in the Pakistan Penal Code, [860 (Act
XLV of 1860), the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act V of 1898) and the
Qanoon-e-Shahadat, 1984 (P.O.No.X of 1984), as the case may be.
CHAPTER II
OFFENCES AND PUNISHMENTS
3. Unauthorized access to information system or data.—-Whoever
with dishonest intention gains unauthorized access to any information system or
data shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three
months or with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees or with both.
4. Unauthorized copying or transmission of data.—Whoever with
dishonest intention and without authorization copies or otherwise transmits or
causes to be transmitt:d any data shall be punished with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one hundred
thousand rupees or with both.
5. Interference with information system or data.—Whoever with
dishonest intention in-erferes with or damages or causes to be interfered with or
damages any part or whole of an information system or data shall be punished
with imprisonment which may extend to two years or with fine which may
extend to five hundrec: thousand rupees or with both.
6. Unauthorized access to critical infrastructure information
system or data.— Whoever with dishonest intention gains unauthorized access to
any critical infrastructure information system or data shall be punished with
imprisonment which raay extend to three years or with fine which may extend to
one million rupees or with both.
7. Unauthorized copying or transmission of critical infrastructure
data.— Whoever witt dishonest intention and without authorization copies or
otherwise transmits or causes to be transmitted any critical infrastructure data
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years,
or with fine which may extend to five million rupees or with both.
PARTI] THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., AUGUST 22, 201 73t
_ 8. Interference with critical infrastructure information system or
data.— Whoever with dishonest intention interferes with or damages, or causes
to be interfered with or damaged, any part or whole of a critical information
system, or data , shali be punished with imprisonment which may extend to seven
years or with fine which may extend to ten million rupees or with both.
9, Glorification of an offence.—(1) Whoever prepares or
disseminates information, through any information system or device, with the
intent to glorify an offence relating to terrorism, or any person convicted of a
crime relating to terrorism, or activities of proscribed organizations or individuals
or groups shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
seven years or with fine which may extend to ten million rupees or with both.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section “glorification”
includes depiction of any form of praise or celebration in a desirable
manner.
_ 16. Cyber terrorism.— Whoever commits or threatens to commit any
of the offences under sections 6, 7, 8 or 9, where the commission or threat is with
the intent to,— :
(a) coerce, intimidate, create a sense of fear, panic or insecurity in the
Government or the public or a section of the public or community
or sect or create a sense of fear or insecurity in society; or
(b) advance inter-faith, sectarian or ethnic hatred; or
(c) advance the objectives of organizations or individuals or groups
proscribed under the law, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to fourteen years or
with fine which may extend to fifty million rupees or with both.
11. Hate speech.—-Whocever prepares or disseminates information,
through any information system or device, that advances or is likely to advance
interfaith, sectarian or racial hatred, shail be punished with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to seven years or with fine or with both.
12. Recruitment, funding and planning of terrorism.—Whoever
prepares or disseminates information, through any information systemr or device,
that invites or motivates to fund, or recruits people for terrorism or plans for
terrorism shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
seven years or with fine or with both.
13. Electronic forgery.—(1) Whoever interferes with or uses any
information system, device or data, with the intent to cause damage or injury to
the public or to any person, or to make any illegal claim or title or to cause any
person to part with property or to enter into any express or implied contract, or
752 THE GAZET IE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., AUGUST 22. 2016 [PART I
with intent to commit fraud by any input, alteration, deletion, or suppression of
data, resulting in unauthentic data with the intent that it be considered or acted
upon for legal purposes as if it were authentic. regardless of the fact that the data
is directly readable ard intelligible or not, shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description ‘or a term which may extend to three years, or with fine
which may extend to two hundred and fifty thousand rupees or with both.
(2) Whoever commits offence under sub-section (1) in relation to a
critical infrastructure information system or data shal! be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years or with fine which
may extend to five million rupees or with both.
14. Electronic fraud.—Whoever with the intent for wrongful gain
interferes with or uses any information system, device or data or induces any
person to enter into a relationship or deceives any person, which act or omission
is likely to cause damage or harm to that person or any other person shall be
punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or with
fine which may extend to ten million rupees or with both. .
15. Making, obtaining, or supplying device for use in offence. —
Whoever produces, makes, generates, adapts, exports, supplies, offers to supply
or imports for use any information system, data or device, with the intent to be
used or belicving that it is primarily to be used to commil or to assist in the
commission of an offence under this Act shall, without prejudice to any other
liability that he may incur in this behalf, be punished with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to six months or with fine which may extend to fifty
thousand rupees or with both.
16. Unauthorized use of identity information.—{1) Whoever obtains,
sells, possesses, transmits or uses another person's identity information without
authorization shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend
to three years or with fine which may extend to five million rupees, or with both.
(2) Any pe'son whose identity information is obtained, sold, possessed,
used or transmitted may apply to the Authority for securing, destroying, blocking
access or preventing, transmission of identity information referred to in sub-
section (1) and the Authority on receipt of such application may take such
measures as deemed appropriate for securing, destroying or preventing
transmission of such identity information.
17. Unauthorized issuance of SIM cards ete—Whoever sells or
otherwise provides subscriber identity module (SIM) card, re-usable
identification modul? (R-IUM) or universal integrated circuit card (UICC) or
other module designed for authenticating users to establish connection with the
network and to be used in cellular mobile, wireless phone or other digital devices
ParTI] THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., AUGUST 22, 2016 753
such as tablets, without obtaining and verification of the subscriber’s antecedents
in the mode and manner for the time being approved by the Authority shall be
punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with
fine which may extend to five hundred thousand rupees or with both. —
18. Tampering, etc. of communication equipment.—Whoever
unlawfully or without authorization changes, alters, tampers with or re-programs
unique device identifier of any communication equipment including a cellular or
wireless handset and starts using or marketing such device for transmitting and
receiving information shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to
three years or with fine which may extend to one million rupees or with both.
Explanation..—A “unique device identifier” is an electronic
equipment identifier which is unique to a communication device.
19. Unauthorized interception—Whoever with dishonest intention
commits unauthorized interception by technical means of—
(a) any transmission that is not intended to be and is not open to the
public, from or within an information system; or
(b) electromagnetic emissions from an information system that are
carrying data, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years or with fine
which may extend to five hundred thousand rupees or with both.
20. Offences against dignity of a natural person.—{1) Whoever
intentionally and publicly exhibits or displays or transmits any information
through any information system, which he knows to be false, and intimidates or
harms the reputation or privacy of a natural person, shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with fine which may
extend to one million rupees or with both:
Provided that nothing under this sub-section shall apply to anything aired
by a broadcast media or distribution service licensed under the Pakistan
Electronic Media Regulatory Authority Ordinance, 2002 (XIII of 2002).
(2} Any aggrieved person or his guardian, where such person is a
minor, may apply to the Authority for removal,-destruction of or blocking access
to such information referred to in sub-section (])} and the Authority on receipt of
such application, shall forthwith pass such orders as deemed reasonable in the
circumstances including an order for removal, destruction, preventing
transmission of or blocking access to such information and the Authority may
also direct any of its licensees to secure such information including traffic data,
754 THE GAZET -E OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., AUGUST 22, 2016 [PART I
21. Offences against modesty of a natural person and minor.—
(1) Whoever intentionally and publicly exhibits or displays or transmits any
information which,
(a) supertmroses a photograph of the face of a natural person over any
sexually 2xplicit image or video; or
(b) includes a photograph or a video of a natural person in sexually
explicit conduct; or
{c) intimidatzs a natural person with any sexual act, or any sexually
explicit image or video of a natural person; or
{d) cultivates, entices or induces a natural person to engage in a
sexually 2xplicit act,
through an information system to harm a natural person or his reputation, or to
take revenge, or to create hatred or to blackmail, shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may cxtend to five years or with fine which may
extend to five million rupees or with both.
{2) Whoever commits an offence under sub-section (1) with respect to
a minor shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
seven years and with fine which may extend to five million rupees:
Provided that n case of a person who has been previously convicted of
an offence under sub-:ection (1) with respect to a minor shall be punished with
imprisonment for a terin of ten years and with fine.
(3) Any agg-teved person or his guardian, where such person is a
“minor, may apply to the Authority for removal, destruction of or blocking access
to such information reterred to in sub-section (1) and the Authority, on receipt of
such application, shall forthwith pass such orders as deemed reasonable in the
circumstances includng an order for removal, destruction, preventing
transmission of or blocking access to such information and the Authority may
also direct any of its licensees to secure such information including traffic data.
22. Child pornography.—({1) Whoever intentionally produces, offers
or makes available, distributes or transmits through an information system or
procures for himself or for another person or without lawful justification
possesses material in an information system, that visually depicts—
{a} aminor engaged in sexually explicit conduct;
(b) a person appearing to be a minor engaged in sexually explicit
conduct; or
(c) realistic images representing a minor engaged in sexually explicit
conduct; or
{d) discloses the identity of the minor,
PARTI] THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., AUGUST 22, 2016 755
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years,
or with fine which may extend to five million rupees or with both.
(2) Any aggrieved person or his guardian, where such person is a
minor. may apply to the Authority for removal, destruction of or blocking access
to such information referred to in sub-section (1) and the Authority, on receipt of
such application, shall forthwith pass such orders as deemed reasonable in the
circumstances, including an order for removal, destruction, preventing
transmission of or blocking access to such information and the Authority may
also direct any of its licensees to secure such information including traffic data.
23. Malicious code—Whoever willfully and without authorization
writes, offers, makes available, distributes or transmits malicious code through an
information system or device, with intent to cause harm to any information
system or data resulting in the corruption, destruction, alteration, suppression, |
theft or loss of the information system or data shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or with fine which may
extend to one million rupées or with both,
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, the expression
“malicious code” includes, a computer program or a hidden function in a
program that damages an information system or data or compromises the
performance of such system or availability of data or uses it without
proper authorization.
24. Cyber stalking—{1) A person commits the offence of cyber
stalking who, with the intent to coerce or intimidate or harass any person, uses
information system, information system network, the Internet, website, electronic
mail or any other similar means of communication to—
(a) follow a person or contacts or attempts to contact such person to -
foster personal interaction repeatedly despite a clear indication of
disinterest by such person;
(b) monitor the use by a person of the internet, electronic mail, text
message or any other form of electronic communication;
(c) watch or spy upon a person in a manner that results in fear of
violence or serious alarm or distress, in the mind of such person; or
(d) take a photograph or make a video of any person and displays or
distributes it without his consent in a manner that harms a person.
(2) Whoever commits the offence specified in sub-section (1) shall
be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or
with fine which may extend to one million rupees or with both:
756 THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., AUGUST 22, 2016 [PART I
Provided that f victim of the cyber stalking under sub-section (1) is a
minor the punishment may extend to five years or with fine which may extend to
ten million rupees or with both.
(3) Any agpieved person or his guardian, where such person is a
minor, may apply to the Authority for removal, destruction of or blocking access
to such information referred to in sub-section (1) and the Authority, on receipt of
such application, shall forthwith pass such orders as deemed reasonable in the
circumstances includng an order for removal, destruction, preventing
transmission of or blocking access to such information and the Authority may
‘also direct any of its licensees to secure such information including traffic data.
25. Spamming.—(|) A person commits the offence of spamming, who
with intent transmits harmful, fraudulent, misleading, illegal or unsolicited
information to any person without permission of the recipient or who causes any
information system to show any such information for wrongful gain.
(2) A person including an institution or an organization engaged in
direct marketing shall provide the option to the recipient of direct marketing to
unsubscribe from such marketing.
(3} Whoever commits the offence of spamming as described in
sub-section (1) by t-ansmitting harmful, fraudulent, misleading or illegal
information, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend
to three months or with fine of rupees fifty thousand which may extend upto
rupees five million or with both.
(4) Whoever commits the offence of spamming as described in
sub-section (1) by trensmitting unsolicited information, or engages in direct
marketing in violation >f sub-section (2), for the first time, shall be punished with
fine not exceeding fifty thousand rupees, and for every subsequent violation shall
be punished with fine not less than fifty thousand rupees that may extend up to
one miilion rupees.
26, Spoofing —{1} Whoever with dishonest intention establishes a
website or sends any information with a counterfeit source intended to be
believed by the recipient or visitor of the website, to be an authentic source
commits spoofing.
(2) Whoever commits spoofing shall be punished with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to three years or with fine which may extend to five
hundred thousand rupees or with both.
27. Legal recognition of offences committed in relation to
information system.—-(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law
for the time being in force, an offence under this Act or any other !aw shall not be
PARTI] THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., AUGUST 22, 2016 757
e=Q0QQNesSsSssssssSSSSS SS
denied legal recognition and enforcement for the sole reason of such offence
being committed in relation to or through the use of an information system.
(2) References to “property” in any Jaw creating an offence in relation
to or concerning property, shall include information system and data.
28. Pakistan Penal Code, 1860 (Act XLV of 1860) to apply.—The
provisions of the Pakistan Penal Code, 1860 (Act XLV of 1860), to the extent not
inconsistent with anything provided in this Act, shall apply to the offences
provided in this Act.
CHAPTER III
ESTABLISHMENT OF INVESTIGATION AGENCY AND PROCEDURAL
POWERS FOR INVESTIGATION
29. Establishment of investigation agency.—({1) The Federal
Government may establish or designate a law enforcement agency as the
investigation agency for the purposes of investigation of offences under this Act.
(2) Unless otherwise provided for under this Act, the investigation
agency and the authorized officer shall in all matters follow the procedure laid
down in the Code to the extent that it is not inconsistent with any provision of
this Act.
(3) The investigation agency shall establish its own capacity for
forensic analysis of the data or in information systems and the forensic analysis
reports generated, by the investigation agency shall not be inadmissible in
evidence before any court for the sole reason that such reports were generated by
the investigation agency.
(4) Notwithstanding provisions of any other law, the Federal
Government shall make rules for appointment and promotion in the investigation
agency including undertaking of specialized courses in digital forensics, —
information technology, computer science and other related matters for training
of the officers and staff of the investigation agency.
30. Power to investigate—Only an authorized officer of the
investigation agency shall have the powers to investigate an offence under this
Act:
Provided that the Federal Government or the Provincial Government
may, as the case may be, constitute one or more joint investigation teams
comprising of an authorized officer of the investigation agency and any other law
enforcement agency for investigation of an offence under this Act and any other
law for the time being in force.
758 THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., AUGUST 22, 2016 (PART I.
31. Expedited preservation and acquisition of data—{1) If an
authorised officer is satisfied that—
(a) specific jata stored in any information system or by means of an
informat on system is reasonably required for the purposes of a
criminal investigation; and -
(b) there is a risk or vulnerability that the data may be modified, lost,
destroyed or rendered inaccessible,
the authorizec. officer may, by written notice given to the person in
control of the information system, require that person to provide that data or to
ensure that the data specified in the notice be preserved and the integrity thereof
is maintained for a period not exceeding ninety days as specified in the notice:
Provided that the authorized officcr shal! immediately but not later than
twenty-four hours bring to the notice of the Court, the fact of acquisition of such
‘data and the Court on receipt of such information may pass such orders as
deemed appropriate in the circumstances of the case including issuance of
warrants for retention 9f such data or otherwise.
(2) The period provided in sub-section (1) for preservation of data may
be extended by the Court if so deemed necessary upon receipi of an application
from the authorized officer in this behalf.
_ 32. Retention of traffic data—{!) A service provider shall, within its
existing or required technical capability, retain its specified traffic data for a
minimum period of o1e year or such period as the Authority may notify from
time to time and, subject to production of a warrant issued by the Court, provide
that data to the investigation agency or the authorized officcr whenever so
required.
(2) The service providers shall retain the traffic data under sub-section
(1) by fulfilling all the requirements of data retention and its originality as
provided under sections 5 and 6 of the Electronic Transactions Ordinance, 2002
(LI of 2002).
(3) Any owner of the information system who is not a licensee of the.
Authority and violates sub-section (1) shall be guilty of an offence punishable, if
committed for the first time, with fine which may extend to ten million rupees
and upon any subsecuent conviction shall be punishable with imprisonment
which may extend to six months or with fine or with both:
Provided that where the violation is committed by a licensee of the
Authority, the same shall be deemed to be a violation of the terms and conditions
of the licensee ard shall be treated as such under the Pakistan
Telecommunication (F.e-organization} Act, 1996 (XVII of 1996).
PARTI] THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., AUGUST 22, 2016 759
b
33. Warrant for search or seizure.—<1) Upon an application by an
authorized officer that demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Court that there
exist reasonable grounds to believe that there may be in a specified place an
information system, data, device or other articles that—
(a) may reasonably be required for the purpose of a criminal
investigation or criminal proceedings which may be material as
evidence in proving a specifically identified offence made out
under this Act; or
(b) has been acquired by a person as a result of the commission of an
offence, the Court may issue a warrant which shall authorize an
officer of the investigation agency, with such assistance as may be
necessary, to enter the specified place and to search the premises
and any information system, data, device or storage medium
rclevant to the offence identified in the application and access, seize
or similarly secure any information system, data, device or other
articles relevant to the offence identified in the application.
(2) In circumstances involving an offence under section 10, under
which a warrant may be issued but cannot be obtained without the apprehension
of destruction, alteration or loss of data, information system, data, device or other
articles required for investigation, the authorized officer, who shall be a Gazetted
officer of the investigation agency, may enter the specified place and search the
premises and any information system, data, device or other articles relevant to the
offence and access, seize or similarly secure any information system, data, device
or other articles relevant to the offence:
Provided that the authorized officer shall immediately but not later than
twenty-four hours bring to the notice of the Court, the fact of such search or
seizure and the Court on receipt of such information may pass such orders as
deemed appropriate in the circumstances of the case.
34. Warrant for disclosure of content data—{1) Upon an application
by an authorised officer that demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Court that
there exist reasonable grounds to believe that the content data stored in an
information system is reasonably required for the purpose of a criminal
investigation or criminal proceedings with respect to an offence made out under
this Act, the Court may, after recording reasons, order that the person in contro]
of the data or information system, to provide such data or access to such data to
the authorized officer.
(2) ‘The period of a warrant issued under sub-section (1) may be
extended beyond seven days if, on an application, a Court authorizes an
extension for a further period of time as may be specified by the Court.
760 THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., AUGUST 22, 2016 [PART I
35.
Powers of an authorized officer—{1) Subject to provisions of
this Act, an authorizec! officer shall have the powers to—
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)

(f)
(g)
(2)
have access to and inspect the operation of any specified
information system;
use or cause to be used any specilied information system to search
any specified data contained in or available to such system;
obtain aad copy only relevant data, use equipment to make copies
and obtain an intelligible output from an information system;
have access to or demand any information in readable and
comprehensible format or plain version;
require any person by whom or on whose behalf, the authorized
officer t.as reasonable cause to believe, any information system has
been used to grant access to any data within an information system
within the control of such person;
require any person having charge of or otherwise concemed with
the operation of any information system to provide him reasonable
technica! and other assistance as the authorized officer may require
for investigation of an offence under this Act; and
require any person who is in possession of decryption information
of an information system, device or data under investigation to
grant him access to such data, device or information system in
unencrypted or decrypted intelligible format for the purpose of
investigating any such offence:
Eaplanation —Decryption information means information or
technology that enables a person to readily retransform or
unscramble encrypted data from its unreadable form and from
ciphered data to intelligible data.
In exercise of the power of search and seizure of any information
system, program or data the authorized officer at all times shall,—
(a)
(b)
act with proportionality;
take ali precautions to maintain integrity and secrecy of the
information system and data in respect of which a warrant for
search or seizure has been issued;
PARTI] THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., AUGUST 22, 2016 761
(c) not disrupt or interfere with the integrity or running and operation
of any information system or data that is not the subject of the
offences identified in the application for which a warrant for search
or seizure has been issued;
(d) avoid disruption to the continued legitimate business operations and
the premises subjected to search or seizure under this Act; and
(e) avoid disruption to any information system, program or data not
connected with the information system that is not the subject of the
offences identified in the application for which a warrant has been
issued or is not necessary for the investigation of the specified
offence in respect of which a warrant has been issued.
(3) ‘When seizing or securing any data or information system, the
authorized officer shali make all efforts to use technical measures to maintain its
integrity and chain of custody. The authorized officer shal! seize an information
system, data, device or articles, in part or in whole, as a last resort only in the
event where it is not possible under the circumstances to use such technical
measures or where use of such technical measures by themselves shali not be
sufficient to maintain the integnty and chain of custody of the data or
information system being seized.
(4) Where an- authorized officer seizes or secures any data or
information system, the authorized officer shall ensure that data or information
system while in the possession or in the access of the authorized officer is not
released to any other person including competitors or public at large and details
including log of any action performed on the information system or data is
maintained in a manner prescribed under this Act.
36. Dealing with seized data or information system.—{1) If any data
or information system has been scized or secured following a search or seizure
under this Act, the authorized officer who undertook the search or seizure shall,
at the time of the seizure,—
(a) make a list of what has been seized or rendered inaccessible, with
the date and time of seizure; and
(b) give a copy of that list to,—
(i) the occupier of the premises; or
Gi) the owner of the data or information system; or
(iii) the person from whose possession the data or information
system has been seized, in a prescribed manner in the
presence of two witnesses.
762 THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., AUGUST 22, 2016 [PART |
(2) The authorized officer, upon an application of the owner of the data
or information system or an authorized agent of the owner and on payment of
prescribed costs, shall provide forensic image of the data or information system
to the owner or his authorized agent within a time prescribed under this Act.
(3) If the authorized officer has reasons to believe that providing
forensic image of the d.ta or information system to the owner under sub-section (2)
may prejudice,—
(a) the investigation in connection with which the search was carried
out; or
(b) another ongoing investigation; or
(c) any cnminal proceedings that are pending or that may be brought in
relation t> any of those investigations, the authorized officer shall,
within seven days of receipt of the application under sub-section (2),
approach the Court for seeking an order not to provide copy of the
seized data or information system.
(4) The Court, upon receipt of an application from an authorized
officer under sub-section (3), may after recording reasons in writing pass such
order as deemed appro driate in the circumstances of the case.
' (5) The costs associated with the exercise of rights under this section
shall be bome by the psrson exercising these rights.
37. Unlawful on-line content—{1)} The Authority shall have the
power to remove or block or issue directions for removal or blocking of access to
an information through any information system if it considers it necessary in the .
interest of the glory of Islam or the integrity, security or defence of Pakistan or
any part thereof, publi: order, decency or morality, or in relation to contempt of
court or commission of or incitement to an offence under this Act.
(2} The Auttority shall, with the approval of the Federal Government,
prescribe rules providing for, among other matters, safeguards, transparent
process and effective oversight mechanism for exercise of powers under
sub-section (1).
(3} Until such rules are prescribed under sub-section (2), the Authority
shall exercise its powers under this Act or any other law for the time being in
force in accordance with the directions issued by the Federal Government not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act.
(4) Any person aggrieved from any order passed by the Authority
under sub-seciton (1), may file an application with the Authority for review of
the order within thirty days from the date of passing of the order.
PARTI] THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., AUGUST 22, 2016 763
nd
(5) An appeal against the decision of the Authority in review shail lie
before the High Court within thirty days of the order of the Authority in review.
38. Limitation of liability of service providers—{1) No service .
provider shall be subject.to any civil or criminal liability, unless it is established
that the service provider had specific actual knowledge and willful intent to
proactively and positively participate, and not merely through omission or failure
to act, and thereby facilitated, aided or abetted the use by any person of any
information system, service, application, online platform or telecommunication
system maintained, controlled or managed by the service provider in connection
with a contravention of this Act or rules made thereunder or any other law for the
time being in force:
Provided that the burden to prove that a service provider had specific
actual knowledge, and willful intent to proactively and positively participate in
any act that gave rise to any civil or criminal liability shall be upon the person
alleging such facts and no interim or final orders, or directions shall be issued
with respect to a service provider by any investigation agency or Court unless
such facts have so been proved and determined:
Provided further that such allegation and its proof shall clearly identify
with specificity the content, material or other aspect with respect to which civil or
criminal liability ts claimed including but not limited to unique identifiers such as
the Account Identification (Account ID), Uniform Resource Locator (URL), Top
Level Domain (TLD), Intemet Protocol Addresses {IP Addresses), or other
unique identifier and clearly state the statutory provision and basis of the claim.
(2) No service provider shall under any circumstance be liable under
this Act, rules made thereunder or any other law for maintaining and making
available the provision of their service in good faith.
(3) No service provider shall be subject to any civil or criminal liability
as a result of informing a subscriber, user or end-users affected by any claim,
notice or exercise of any power under this Act, rules made thereunder or any
other law:
Provided that the service provider, for a period not exceeding fourteen
days, shall keep confidential and not disclose the existence of any investigation
or exercise of any power under this Act when a notice to this effect is served
upon it by an authorized officer, which period of confidentiality may be extended
beyond fourteen days if, on an application by the authorized officer, the Court
authorizes an extension for a further specified period upon being satisfied that
reasonable cause for such extension exists.
. (4) No service provider shall be liable under this Act, rules made
thereunder or any other law for the disclosure of any data or other information
that the service provider discloses only to the extent of the provisions of this Act.
764 THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., AUGUST 22. 2016 [PART I
(5) No service provider shall be under any obligation to proactively
monitor, make inquiries about material or content hosted, cached. routed,
relayed, conduit, trans nitted or made available by such intermediary or service
provider.
39. Real-time collection and recording of information—1) If a
Court is satisfied on the basis of information furnished by an authorized officer
that there are reasonab'e grounds to believe that the content of any information is
reasonably required for the purposes of a specific criminal investigation, the
Court may order, with respect to information held by or passing through a service
provider, to a designated agency as notified under the Investigation for Fair Trial
Act, 2013 (I of 2013) or any other law for the time being in force having
capability to collect real time information, to collect or record such information
in real-time in coordination with the investigation agency for provision in the
prescribed manner:
Provided that such real-time collection or recording shall not be ordered
for a period beyond what is absolutely necessary and in any event for not more
than seven days.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law to the contrary the
information so collected under sub-section (1) shall be admissible in evidence.
(3) The period of real-time collection or recording may be extended
beyond seven days if, on an application, the Court authorizes an extension for a
further specified periocd.
(4) The Court may also require the designated agency to keep
confidential the fact of the execution of any power provided for in this section
and any information relating to it.
(5) The application under sub-sections (1) and (2) shall in addition to
substantive grounds and reasons also,—
(a) explain why it is believed that the data sought will be available with
the person in control of an information system;
(b) identify and explain with specificity the type of information likely
to be fouid on such information system;
(c} identify znd explain with specificity the identified offence made out
under this Act in respect of which the warrant is sought:
(d) if author ty to seek real-time collection or recording on more than
one occasion is needed, explain why and how many further
disclosurzs are needed to achieve the purpose for which the warrant
is to be issued;
PARTI] THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., AUGUST 22, 2016 765
(c) specify what measures shall be taken to prepare and ensure that the
real-time collection or recording is carried out whilst maintaining
the privacy of other users, customers and third parties and without
the disclosure of information of any person not part of the
investigation;
(f) explain why the investigation may be frustrated or seriously
prejudiced unless the real time collection or recording is permitted;
and
(g) why, to achieve the purpose for which the warrant is being applied,
real time coijlection or recording by the person in control] of the
information system is necessary.
40. Forensic laboratory.—The Federal Government shail establish or
designate a forensic laboratory, independent of the investigation agency, to
provide expert opinion before the Court or for the benefit of the investigation
agency in relation to electronic evidence collected for purposes of investigation
and prosecution of offences under this Act.
41. Confidentiality of information.—Notwithstanding immunity
granted under any other law for the time being in force, any person including a
service provider while providing services under the terms of lawful contract or
otherwise in accordance with the law, or an authorized officer who has secured
access to any material or data containing personal information about another
person, discloses such material to any other person, except when required by law,
without the consent of the person concerned or in breach of lawful contract with
the intent to cause or knowing that he is likely to cause harm, wrongful loss or
gain to any person or compromise confidentiality of such material or data shall
be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or
with fine which may extend to one million rupees or with both:
Provided that the burden of proof of any defense taken by an accused
service provider or an authorized officer that he was acting in good faith, shall be
on such a service provider or the authorized officer, as the case may be.
CHAPTER IV
INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION
42. International cooperation—({1) The Federal Government may
upon receipt of a request, through the designated agency under this Act, extend
such cooperation to any foreign government, 24 x 7 network, any foreign agency
or any international organization or agency for the purposes of investigations or
proceedings concerning offences related to information systems, electronic
766 THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., AUIGUST 22. 2016 [PART I
communication or deta or for the collection of evidence in electronic form
relating to an offence or obtaining expeditious preservation and disclosure of data
by means of an information system or real-time collection of data associated with
specified communicat.ons or interception of data under this Act.
(2) The Federal Government may forward to a foreign government,
24x7 network, any fcreign agency or any international agency or organization
any information obtained from its own investigations if it considers that the
disclosure of such information might assist the other government, agency or
organization etc., as the case be, in initiating or carrying out investigations or
proceedings concemir.g any offence under this Act.
(3), The Federal Government shall require the foreign government,
24 x 7 network, any foreign agency or any international organization or agency to
keep the information provided confidential and use it strictly for the purposes it is
provided.
(4) The Federal Government may, through the designated agency, send
and answer requests for mutual assistance the execution of such requests or their
transmission to the au:horities competent for their execution.
(5) The Federal Government may refuse to accede to any request made
by a foreign government, 24 x 7 network, any foreign agency or any international
organization or agency, if,—
(a) it is of the opinion that the request, if granted, would prejudice
sovereignty, security, public order or other essential public interest
of Pakistan;
(b) the offeace is regarded by the Federal Government as being of a
political nature;
(c) there are substantial grounds for believing that the request for
assistance has been made for the purpose of prosecuting a person
on account of that person's race, sex, religion, nationality, ethnic:
origin cr political opinions or that that person's position may be
prejudiced for any of those reasons;
(d) the request relates to an offence the prosecution of which in the
requesti ig State may be incompatible with the laws of Pakistan;
(e) the assistance requested requires the Federal Government to carry
out compulsory measures that may be inconsistent with the laws or
practices of Pakistan had the offence been the subject of
investigation or prosecution under its own jurisdiction; or
PaRTI} THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., AUGUST 22, 2016 767
(f) the request concerns an offence which may prejudice an ongoing
investigation or trial or rights of its citizens guaranteed under the
Constitution.
{6) Where the Federal Government decides to provide the requested
cooperation, the relevant requirements and safeguards provided under this Act
and rules framed thereunder shall be followed.
(7) The designated agency shall maintain a register of requests received
from any foreign government, 24 x 7 network, any foreign agency or any
international organization or agency under this Act and action taken thereon.
CHAPTER - V
PROSECUTION AND TRIAL OF OFFENCES
43. Offences to be compoundable and non-cognizable.—{1) Ail
offences under this Act, except the offences under sections 10, 21 and 22 and
abetment thercof, shall be non-cognizable, bailable and compoundable:
Provided that offences under section 17 shall be cognizable by the
investigation agency on a written complaint by the Authority.
(2) Offences under sections t0, 21 and 22 and abetment thereof shall
be non-bailable, non-compoundable and cognizable by the investigation agency.
44. Cognizance and trial of offences.—-(1) The Federal Government, in
consultation with the Chief Justice of respective High Court, shall designate
presiding officers of the Courts to try offences under this Act at such places as
deemed necessary.
(2) The Federal Government shall, in consultation with the Chief
Justice of respective High Court, arrange for special training of the presiding
officers of the Court to be conducted by an entity notified by the Federal
Government for training on computer sciences, cyber forensics, electronic
transactions and data protection.
(3) Prosecution and trial of an offence under this Act committed by a
minor shall be conducted under the Juvenile Justice System Ordinance, 2000
{XXH of 2000).
(4) To the extent not inconsistent with this Act, the procedure laid
down under the Code and the Qanoon-e-Shahadat, 1984 (P.O.No.X of 1984),
shall be followed.
. 45. Order for payment of compensation.—{!) The Court may, in
addition to award of any punishment including fine under this Act, make an order
for payment of compensation to the victim for any damage or toss caused and the
compensation so awarded shall be recoverable as arrears of land revenue:
768 THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., AUGUST 22, 2016 [PART I
Provided that the compensation awarded by the Court shall not prejudice
any right to a civil remedy for the recovery of damages beyond the amount of
compensation so awarded.
46. Appointment of amicus curiae and seeking expert opinion.—The
Court may appoint amicus curiae or seck independent expert opinion on any
matter connected with a case pending before it.
47, Appeal.—An appeal against the final judgment or order of a Court
shall , within thirty days from the date of provision of its certified copy free of
cost, lie—
(a) to the High Court concerned against such judgment or order if
passed Ey a court of sessions; or
(b) to the court of sessions concerned against such judgment or order if
passed t-y a magistrate.
CHAPTER Vi
PREVENTIVE MEASURES
48. Prevention of electronic crimes.—(1) The Federal Government or
the Authority, as the case may be, may issue directives to be followed by the
owners of the designated information systems or service providers in the interest
of preventing any offence under this Act.
{2} Any owner of the information system who is not a licensee of the
Authority and violates the directives issued under sub-section (1) shall be guilty
of an offence punishable, if committed for the first time, with fine which may
extend to ten millicn rupees and upon any subsequent conviction shalt be
punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six months or with fine or
with both:
Provided that where the violation is committed by a licensee of the
Authority, the same shall be deemed to be a violation of the terms and conditions
of the licensee ¢nd shall be treated as such under the Pakistan
Telecommunication (Re-organization) Act, 1996.
49. Computer emergency response teams.—{1) The Federal
Government may coristitute one or more computer emergency response teams to
respond to any threat against or attack on any critical infrastructure information
systems or critical infrastructure data, or widespread attack on information
systems in Pakistan.
PARTI] THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., AUGUST 22, 2016 769
(2) A computer emergency response team constituted under sub-section (1)
may comprise of technical experts of known expertise officers of any intelligence
or agency or any sub-set thereof.
(3) A computer emergency response team shall respond to a threat or
attack without causing any undue hindrance or inconvenience to the use and
access of the information system or data as may be prescribed.
CHAPTER VH
MISCELLANEOUS
50. Relation of the Act with other laws.—{1) The provisions of this
Act shall have effect not in derogation of the Pakistan Penal Code, 1860 (Act
XLV of 1860). the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act V of 1898), the
Qanoon-e-Shahadat, 1984 (P.O. No. X of 1984), the Protection of Pakistan Act,
2014 (X of 2014) and the Investigation for Fair Triat Act, 2013 (1 of 2013).
(2) Subject to sub-section (1), the provisions of this Act shall have
effect notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law on the .
subject for the time being in force.
51. Power to make rules—{1) The Federat Government may, by
notification in the official Gazette, make rules for carrying out purposes of this
Act.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such
rules may specify,—
(a) qualifications and trainings of the officers and staff of the
investigation agency and prosecutors;
{b) powers, functions and responsibilities of the investigation agency,
its officers and prosecutors;
(c) standard , operating procedures of the investigation agency;
(d) mode and manner in which record of investigation under this Act
may be maintained;
(¢) manner to deal with the seized data, information system, device or
other articles;
(f} working of joint investigation teams;
770 THE GAZETT!: OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., AUGUST 22, 2016 [PART I
(g)
(h)
(i)
Gj)
(k)
q)
(m)
(n}
(0)
(p)
(D
52.
requiremeits for seeking permission of the Authority to change,
alter or re-programme unique device identifier of any
communication equipment by any person for research or any othe
legitimate purpose;
procedure for seeking appropriate orders of the Authority for
removal, destruction or blocking access to information under this
Act;
constitution of computer emergency response team and the standard
operating procedure to be adopted by such team;
appointment of designated agency having capability to collect real
time information; ;
manner of coordination between the investigation agency and other
law enforzement and intelligence agencies including designated
agency;
for managment and oversight of the forensic laboratory;
qualifications and trainings of the officers, experts and staff of the
forensic laboratory;
powers, functions and responsibilities of the forensic laboratory, its
officers, experts and staff;
‘standard operating procedures of the forensic laboratory to interact
with the investigation agency;
manner of soliciting and extending international cooperation; and
matters connected or ancillary thereto.
Removal of difficulties.—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to
the provisions of this Act, the Federal Government may, within two years of the
commencement of this Act and by order published in the official Gazette, make
such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to
be necessary for removiig the difficulty.
53.
Report to Parliament.—The agency designated or established ©
under section 29 of the Act shall submit a half yearly report to both houses of the
Parliament for consideration by the relevant Committee in camera, in respect of
its activities, without disclosing identity information, in a manner as prescribed
under this Act.
ParRTI] THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., AUGUST 22, 2016 771
54. Amendment of Electronic Transactions Ordinance, 2002
(LI of 2002) and pending proceedings.—{1) Sections 36 and 37 of the
Electronic Transactions Ordinance, 2002 (LI of 2002) are omitted.
(2) Any action taken by or with the approval of the Authority or
proceedings pending under the provisions of the Electronic Transactions
Ordinance, 2002 (LI of 2002) repealed by sub-section (1), shall continue and be
deemed to have been taken or initiated under this Act. ©
55. Savings of powers.—Nothing in this Act shall affect, limit or
prejudice the duly authorized and lawful powers and functions of the institutions
controlled by the Governments exercised and performed in good faith.
ACT NO. XLEOF 2016
An Act further to amend the Banks (Nationalization) Act, 1974
WHEREAS it is expedient further to amend the Banks (Nationalization)
Act, 1974 (XIX of 1974), for the purposes hereinafter appearing;
AND WHEREAS the Supreme Court of Pakistan in a case reported as
‘Muhammad Idris vs Federation of Pakistan, PLD 2011 SC 213° held that the
amendments in question in section }1 of the Banks (Nationalization) Act, 1974,
did not fail within the ambit of sub-clause (a) to (g) of clause (2) of Article 73 of
the Constitution thus could not have been introduced by way of Finance Act,
2007;
It is hereby enacted as follows:—
1. Short title and commencement.—This Act may be called the
Banks (Nationalization) (Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force at once and shall be deemed to have taken
effect on the Ist July, 2007.
2. Amendment of section I1, Act XIX of 1974.—In the Banks
(Nationalization) Act, 1974 (XIX of 1974), in section 11,—
{a) in sub-section (1), for clause (b), the following shall be substituted,
namely:—
“(b) not less than five and not more than seven other members
including one or more directors whose election by the private
shareholders, removal and other matters shall be governed by the
Companies Ordinance, 1984 (XLVII of 1984).” sand
772 THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN. EXTRA., AUGUST 22, 2016 [PART I
{b) in sub-section (3),—
(i) after the word “Board”, the words “representing the Federal
Government’s direct and indirect shareholding”, shall be
ad Jed; and
{ii} for clause (d), the following shall be substituted, namely:—
“(cl} may be re-appointed for second and fina! term by the
Federal Government, in consultation with the State Bank of
Pakistan, for a further period of three years.”.
ABDUL JABBAR ALI,
Secretary.
PRINTED BY THE MAP AGER, PRINTING CORPORATION OF PAKISTAN PRESS, ISLAMABAD.
PUBLISHED BY THE DEPUTY CONTROLLER, STATIONERY AND FORMS, UNIVERSITY ROAD, KARACHL.